This appeal is directed against the judgment and order of
acquittal dated 05.07.2011 passed in C.C.No.1575/2009, whereby
the respondent-accused is acquitted for the offence punishable
under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, (hereinafter
referred to as N.I.Act) and also praying to pass an order to convict
the accused for the offence punishable under Section 138 of
2.    The brief facts of the case are that the appellant-
complainant and the respondent-accused were known to each
other.     The   appellant-complainant    had   given  a   loan   of
Rs.1,50,000/- to the respondent-accused for his family necessities
through a cheque bearing No.146341 for a sum of Rs.1,00,000/-
drawn on Canara Bank, P.J.Extension, Davanagere, and also paid a
sum of Rs.50,000/- in cash. The respondent-accused, having failed
to pay the amount within a reasonable time, had issued three
cheques     bearing    Nos.981735,   981736     and   981737   dated
01.03.2006, 01.04.2006 and 01.05.2006 respectively, for a sum of
Rs.50,000/- each, drawn on Laxmi Villas Bank, Davanagere Branch.
The said cheques were presented to bank for encashment but they
were dishonoured and returned with an endorsement “funds
insufficient”. The appellant-complainant got issued legal notice
dated 22.05.2006, but it was returned with a shara “not claimed”.
Since the respondent-accused failed to repay the loan amount, the
appellant-complainant filed a private compliant under Section 200
Cr.P.C. for the offence punishable under Section 138 N.I.Act. On
recording the sworn statement, the case was registered at
C.C.No.1575/2009. The charges were read over, but the accused
denied the same and claimed to be tried.         The complainant got
himself examined as P.W.1 and documents were marked as per
Exs.P-1 to P-14. The respondent-accused has not led any evidence,
but a letter issued by TATA AIG Life Insurance Company Ltd., is got
marked as Ex.D-1 during the course of cross-examination, D.W.1.
3.    The trial Court, on analysis of the evidence adduced by
the appellant-complainant, arrived at a factual finding that the
respondent-accused had duly issued cheques in question for a sum
of Rs.50,000/- each in favour of the appellant-complainant in
discharge of a debt or liability. The cheques, were presented to the
Bank for payment within the time of validity, but the cheques were
returned unpaid for want of funds in the account of the respondent-
accused in the bank on which the cheques were drawn.
However, the trial Court was of the opinion that appellant-
complainant ought to have issued a notice under Certificate of
Posting (COP) in addition to the notice sending through Registered
Post with Acknowledgment Due (RPAD). With the said observation,
the trial Court has come to the conclusion that the contention of the
appellant-complainant that he intimated the respondent-accused
regarding dishonour of the cheque leads to suspicion as the P.W.1
has also admitted in the cross-examination to a suggestion made
by the respondent-accused that the appellant-complainant has not
sent the legal notice to his correct address. Further it is observed
that the appellant-complainant has not sent the legal notice to the
respondent-accused under certificate of posting, there is no
presumption of proper service of notice to the respondent-accused
and has further held that the appellant-complainant has failed to
prove that he had intimated the respondent-accused regarding
dishonour of cheques and nothing on record that respondent-
accused has received intimation. With these observations, the
complaint came to be dismissed. Being aggrieved by the said order
of acquittal, the appellant-complainant is before this Court.
4.     Heard Sri Gururaj Joshi, learned counsel for the
appellant-complainant     and  Sri   Ramakrishna,    learned  counsel
appearing on behalf of Sri M.R.Hiremathad, learned counsel for the
respondent-accused and perused the judgment and records.
5.     Learned counsel for the appellant-complainant would
contend that the trial Court has rightly came to the conclusion that
the appellant-complainant has discharged his burden in proving the
financial capacity to lend money, issuance of cheque by the
respondent-accused, service of legal notice. All these findings have
not been challenged, the only error committed by the trial Court is
dismissing the complaint on the reason that notice was not sent
under certificate of posting.  The said finding of the trial Court is
erroneous. The documentary evidence placed on record clearly goes
to show that legal notice was sent through registered post
acknowledgment due. Ex.P-12 the envelope, which is returned as
unclaimed, clearly goes to show that there was proper service of
notice as required under Section 17 of General Clauses Act.
However, the trial Court has failed to consider this aspect. Thus, it
has resulted in miscarriage of justice.     In support of the said
contention, learned counsel has relied on the following decisions:
i.   2014 STPL 9253 SC [2014 (AIR (SCW) 4321] in
the  case   of  Ajeet   Seeds  Ltd.   vs. K.Gopala
ii.  2013   STPL    2766   Karnataka   in  the  case   of
M.S.Srikara Rao vs. H.C.Prakash.
iii. 2018 STPL 12982 Karnataka in the case of
Prabhakar Shripati Hegde vs. B.V.Naik
6.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-accused
supported the decision of the trial Court and further submitted that
there are no valid grounds to interfere with the order passed by the
trial Court. There is ample evidence on record to show that there
was a transaction of insurance policy and respondent-accused has
issued a cheque towards payment of premium in respect of the
policy taken by him that it is also the contention of respondent-
accused there was a chit transaction between the accused and the
complainant. Considering all these facts, the trial Court has rightly
come    to  the   conclusion   that   the appellant-complainant  has
intentionally issued legal notice to the wrong address and has
managed to file a false case against the respondent-accused. There
is no convincing evidence to show that the respondent-accused has
committed the offence punishable under Section 138 of N.I.Act.
Thus, the appeal deserves to be dismissed.
7.     Having heard the submission of learned counsel for
both side, the point that arise for consideration would be :
“Whether the trial Court was justified in acquitting the
accused?”
8.     In the present appeal, the legal principles regarding
presumption to be drawn regarding service of legal notice to the
respondent-accused is under consideration. Thus, it is necessary to
ascertain whether there was proper service of notice as per the
procedure prescribed under Section 94 of Negotiable Instruments
Act and the provisions of General Clauses Act.
9.     Section 94 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, reads
“94. Mode in which notice may be given.—Notice of
dishonour may be given to a duly authorized agent of
the person to whom it is required to be given, or, where
he has died, to his legal representative, or, where he
has been declared an insolvent, to his assignee; may be
oral or written; may, if written, be sent by post; and
may be in any form; but it must inform the party to
whom it is given either in express terms or by
reasonable intendment that the instrument has been
dishonoured, and in what way, and that he will be held
liable thereon; and it must be given within a reasonable
time after dishonour, at the place of business or (in
case such party has no place of business) at the
residence of the party for whom it is intended.
If the notice is duly directed and sent by post and
miscarries, such miscarriage does not render the notice
invalid.”
10.    Section 17 of General Clauses Act, 1897, reads as
17.    Substitution of functionaries.(1) In any 31
[Central     Act]   or   Regulation   made     after   the
commencement of this Act, it shall be sufficient, for the
purpose of indicating the application of a law to every
person or number of persons for the time being
executing the functions of an office, to mention the
official title of the officer at present executing the
functions, or that of the officer by whom the functions
are commonly executed.
(2) This section applies also to all [Central Acts]
made after the third day of January, 1868, and to all
Regulations made on or after the fourteenth day of
11.    In the decision reported in 2014 STPL 9253 SC [2014
(AIR (SCW) 4321] in the case of Ajeet Seeds Ltd. vs. K.Gopala
Krishnaiah, the Hon’ble Apex Court has held as under:
“14. Section 27 gives rise to a presumption that
service of notice has been effected when it is sent
to the correct address by registered post. In view
of the said presumption, when stating that a
notice has been sent by registered post to the
address of the drawer, it is unnecessary to further
aver in the complaint that in spite of the return of
the notice unserved, it is deemed to have been
served or that the addressee is deemed to have
knowledge of the notice. Unless and until the
contrary is proved by the addressee, service of
notice is deemed to have been effected at the
time at which the letter would have been
delivered in the ordinary course of business. This
Court has already held that when a notice is sent
by registered post and is returned with a postal
endorsement ‘refused’ or ‘not available in the
house’ or ‘house locked’ or ‘shop closed’ or
‘addressee not in station’, due service has to be
presumed. [Vide Jagdish Singh Vs. Natthu Singh
(1992) 1 SCC 647; State of M.P. Vs. Hiralal & Ors.
(1996) 7 SCC 523 and V.Raja Kumari Vs.
P.Subbarama Naidu & Anr. (2004) 8 SCC 74] It is,
therefore, manifest that in view of the
presumption available under Section 27 of the
Act, it is not necessary to aver in the complaint
under Section 138 of the Act that service of notice
was evaded by the accused or that the accused
had a role to play in the return of the notice
unserved.
10. It is thus clear that Section 114 of the Evidence Act
enables the Court to presume that in the common
course of natural events, the communication would
have been delivered at the address of the addressee.
Section 27 of the GC Act gives rise to a presumption
that service of notice has been effected when it is sent
to the correct address by registered post. It is not
necessary to aver in the complaint that in spite of the
return of the notice unserved, it is deemed to have
been served or that the addressee is deemed to have
knowledge of the notice. Unless and until the contrary is
proved by the addressee, service of notice is deemed to
have been effected at the time at which the letter would
have been delivered in the ordinary course of business.”
12.    On analysis of the evidence placed on record, trial Court
has arrived at the factual finding that the respondent-accused had
duly issued three cheques as per Exs.P-1, P-2 and P-3 for a sum of
Rs.50,000/- each towards discharge of legally payable debt.       The
said cheques were presented to the bank for payment within the
period of its validity, but the said cheques were dishonoured for
want of funds and returned with an endorsement of bank
“insufficient funds” in the account of respondent-accused in the
bank on which the cheques were drawn.         The statutory notice of
dishonour was duly issued, to which there was no response from
the respondent-accused.      The trial Court has rightly came to the
conclusion that the appellant-complainant had financial capacity to
lend money.     The trial Court has also rightly disbelieved Ex.D-1
which is envelope confronted during the evidence of D.W.1 on the
reason that the respondent-accused has not placed cogent evidence
to show that the cheques issued by him in favour of the
complainant is towards payment of premium. It is rightly held that
when the accused admits Exs.P-1 to P-3 belongs to him and the
signatures on the said cheques are also admitted by him, it is for
the respondent-accused to prove that the said cheques were issued
towards payment of premium installments of insurance policy.
There is no plausible explanation by the respondent-accused as to
why Exs.P-1 to P-3 were issued in the name of appellant-
13.   In the present appeal, the trial Court has dismissed the
complaint only on the reason that the legal notice issued through
RPAD to respondent-accused was returned un-served as ‘not
claimed’.   The postal cover sent through RPAD returned as not
claimed does not mean due service of notice.         Even during the
course of cross-examination of P.W.1, nothing has been elicited
regarding service of notice.   When the appellant-complainant has
not   sent  the   legal notice  to  the   respondent-accused    under
certificate of posting, there is no presumption of due service of
notice to the respondent-accused. It is pertinent to note that the
respondent-accused has not placed rebuttal evidence to prove that
the notice was not sent to the correct address and the respondent-
accused was not working at the address shown in the envelope sent
through legal notice. Ex.P-12 is the legal notice postal cover, the
address shown in the said postal cover and the address shown in
the cause title of the complaint are one and the same. The
respondent-accused has not at all denied that he was working as
Health Inspector at the City Municipality Council, Davanagere.
14.  When a sender has dispatched the notice through
registered post with correct address written on it, Section 27 of
General Clauses Act could be profitably imported and in such a
situation service of notice deemed to have been effected on the
sender unless he proves that it was really not served and he was
not responsible for such non-service. In the present case, there is
no rebuttal evidence to show that the complainant has deliberately
and intentionally sent the legal notice to the wrong address and the
accused was not working at the place and address shown in the
registered envelope.
15.  The finding recorded by the Court below regarding
service of notice through registered post holding that there is no
proper service of notice is contrary to Section 138 of N.I.Act. In
view of the ratio laid down in the aforesaid decisions, there is
proper service of notice and there was no requirement to serve the
notice under certificate of posting. The respondent-accused has
failed to rebut the presumption by placing cogent and convincing
evidence.   Therefore, this Court is of the view that the findings
recorded by the Court below cannot be sustained in law.
16.  For the foregoing reasons, this Court proceed to pass
i.   Appeal is allowed.
ii.  The impugned judgment and order of acquittal
dated 05.07.2011 passed in C.C.No.1575/2009 on
the   file of  Prl.Senior Civil  Judge   &   CJM,
Davanagere, is set-aside.
iii. The respondent-accused is      convicted for the
offence punishable under Section 138 of N.I.Act.
iv. The respondent-accused is directed to pay fine
amount of Rs.1,60,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Sixty
Thousand only). Out of the fine amount, a sum of
Rs.10,000/- shall be remitted to State by way of
Rs.1,50,000/- shall be paid to the appellant-
complainant by way of compensation along with
interest at the rate of 6% p.a. from the date of
complaint till realization of the cheque amount.
v.  The amount shall be deposited within eight weeks
from the date of this order.      In case of default,
the appellant shall initiate proceedings.