Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 3511 of 2022
Counsel for Petitioner :- Anurag Kumar Singh,Akhilendra Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Heard Sri Anurag Kumar Singh, learned Counsel for the petitioners, Shri
Dhananjay Kumar Singh, learned Additional Government Advocate for the
State/respondents and perused the material brought on record.
The debit of the bank account of the petitioners has been freezed on the
instructions of the Investigating Officer dated 24.03.2022 by the Axis
Bank, City Centre, XXV/1130 Round West, Thrishur, Kerala as a sequel to
the F.I.R. lodged by the Chief Manager of the Management of Manuments,
Museum, Parks, Garden etc. registered as Case Crime No. 0716 of 2021 at
Lucknow) on 16th September, 2021 for offence punishable under Sections
Feeling aggrieved by the debit freeze of the petitioners' account on the
instructions of the Investigating Officer, the instant writ petition has been
filed by the petitioners.
The contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioners is that as per
Section 102 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, seizure of bank
account shall forthwith be reported to the Magistrate concerned having
jurisdiction and the same is mandatory in nature as prescribed under
Section 102 (3) Cr.P.C. but in the instant case, the Investigating Officer
has not reported the seizure/debit freezing of the petitioners' account to the
Magistrate concerned having jurisdiction, hence the impugned action to
freeze the debit account of the petitioners is contrary to the provisions of
Section 102 (3) Cr.P.C., hence the entire proceeding initiated against the
petitioners is liable to be quashed.
Per contra, learned Additional Government Advocate argued that the
question as to whether Section 102 (3) Cr.P.C. is mandatory or directory,
has already been decided by a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court at
Allahabad in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 11201 of 2021 : Amit Singh
Vs. State of U.P. and others, decided on 18.04.2022, wherein while
observing that Section 102 (3) Cr.P.C. is not mandatory but it is directory,
the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court dismissed the writ petition. It was also
observed that non-reporting of the seizure forthwith, as provided under
Section 102 (3) Cr.P.C., shall not ipso facto render the seizure illegal
particularly as no period is specified and it's consequences have not been
provided. Thus the instant writ petition is also liable to be dismissed.
For convenience, the relevant part of the order dated 18.04.2022 (Supra) is
"(14) In view of submissions of learned counsel for the parties the
main issue which falls for our consideration is as to whether
Section 102(3) Cr.P.C. is mandatory or directory in nature? It is well
settled that non-observance of a mandatory condition is fatal to the
validity of the action. However, non-observance would not matter if
the condition is found to be merely directory. In other words, it is not
that every omission or defect entails the drastic penalty of invalidity.
Whether the provision is mandatory or directory can be ascertained
by looking at the entire scheme and purpose of the provision and
by weighing the importance of the condition, the prejudice to private
rights and the claims of the public interest, therefore, it will depend
upon the provisions of the statute and mere use of word ''shall'
would itself not make the provision mandatory. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana Versus Raghuveer
Dayal (Supra) has held that the use of word 'shall' is ordinarily
mandatory but it is sometimes not so interpreted if the scope of the
enactment, on consequences to flow from such construction would
not so demand.
(15) The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the case of Nasiruddin and
has held that it is well settled that the real intention of the legislation
must be gathered from the language used. It may be true that the
use of the expression ''shall or may' is not decisive for arriving at a
finding as to whether statute is directory or mandatory. But the
intention of the legislature must be found out from the scheme of
the Act. It is also equally well settled that when negative words are
used the courts will presume that the intention of the legislature
was that the provisions are mandatory in character. It has further
been held that if an act is required to be performed by a private
person within a specified time, the same would ordinarily be
mandatory but when a public functionary is required to perform a
public function within a time frame, the same will be held to be
directory unless the consequences therefor are specified. The
relevant paragraphs 38 and 39 are extracted below:-
"38. The court's jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked
when the same is ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case
the court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the texture of
the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention
when the language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. It
cannot add or subtract words to a statute or read something into it
which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. It is also
necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the
legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled
that the real intention of the legislation must be gathered from the
language used. It may be true that use of the expression "shall or
may" is not decisive for arriving at a finding as to whether the
statute is directory or mandatory. But the intention of the legislature
must be found out from the scheme of the Act. It is also equally well
settled that when negative words are used the courts will presume
that the intention of the legislature was that the provisions are
mandatory in character.
39. Yet there is another aspect of the matter which cannot be lost
sight of. It is a well-settled principle that if an act is required to be
performed by a private person within a specified time, the same
would ordinarily be mandatory but when a public functionary is
required to perform a public function within a time-frame, the same
will be held to be directory unless the consequences therefor are
at p. 107 it is pointed out that a statutory direction to private
individuals should generally be considered as mandatory and that
the rule is just the opposite to that which obtains with respect to
public officers. Again, at p. 109, it is pointed out that often the
question as to whether a mandatory or directory construction
should be given to a statutory provision may be determined by an
expression in the statute itself of the result that shall follow non-
compliance with the provision.
"As a corollary of the rule outlined above, the fact that no
consequences of non-compliance are stated in the statute, has
been considered as a factor tending towards a directory
construction. But this is only an element to be considered, and is by
(16) The consequences of non reporting about the seized property
have not been provided under the section. In addition, the
requirement of reporting in the manner, as stated, is on the part of a
public functionary and in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, as noticed above, the same is required to be held
to be directory unless the consequences thereof are specified.
Since the consequences have not been specified, it would be
safe to hold that requirement of Section 102(3) Cr.P.C. cannot
be termed as mandatory but would be directory in nature.
(17) The Scheme for disposal of property under the Code is
provided under Chapter XXXIV of the Cr.P.C. Section 451 provides
that when any property is produced before any Criminal Court
during any inquiry or trial, the Court may make such order as it
thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the
conclusion of the inquiry or trial. Section 452 provides the order for
disposal of property at conclusion of trial. Section 457 (1) provides
that whenever the seizure of property by any police officer is
reported to a Magistrate under the provisions of this Code, and
such property is not produced before a Criminal Court during an
inquiry or trial, the Magistrate may make such order as he thinks fit
respecting the disposal of such property or the delivery of such
property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, or if such
person cannot be ascertained, respecting the custody and
production of such property. Sub-section (2) provides that if the
person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the property
to be delivered to him on such conditions (if any) as the Magistrate
thinks fit and if such person is unknown, the Magistrate may detain
it and shall, in such case, issue a proclamation specifying the
articles of which such property consists, and requiring any person
who may have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish
his claim within six months from the date of such proclamation.
(18) In view of above scheme of the Code the purpose of
information given to the Magistrate regarding seizure of property by
the Police Officer is merely to facilitate its disposal in accordance
with law during pendency of trial or subsequent thereto. Therefore
non reporting of the seizure forthwith, as provided under Section
102(3) Cr.P.C., shall not ipsofacto render the seizure illegal
particularly as no period is specified and it's consequences have
not been provided. Therefore when on an application moved by the
petitioner, the same has been informed, the petitioner may move
the concerned Magistrate for the custody of the property i.e.
unfreezing of the account of the petitioner, which may be dealt with
in accordance with law and on it's own merit.
(19) The Delhi High Court, in the case of Ms.Swaran Sabharwal
Versus Commissioner of Police (Supra), quashed the prohibitory
order on the ground that the moneys in the bank does not
constitute "case property". In the case of Dr. Shashikant D. Karnik
Versus The State of Maharashtra (Supra), the Bombay High Court
allowed the petition on the ground that all the three requirements of
Section 102 Cr.P.C. have not been complied. It appears that in this
case a direction was issued not to permit operation of the bank
accounts of petitioner therein and his family without seizure
therefore the court was of the view that there can not be an interim
order and thereafter it's continuation. The authorities had also failed
to ascertain, by the time it was decided, as to whether there was
any connection of it with the alleged crime. The court has only
mentioned that sub-section (3) of Section 102 lays down a mandate
without any finding as to whether it is mandatory or directory. The
Court without any provision has also observed that there is a fourth
requirement of law that notice is required to be given before
stopping the operation of the account. In the absence of any
specific stipulation in the statute or necessary consequence flowing
from the scheme contained in the Act, we are not inclined to
subscribe to such a view.
(20) In the present case we have considered the issue in detail and
are of the view that sub-Section (3) of Section 102 Cr.P.C. is
directory in nature and once the court has been informed of
freezing of bank account on an application moved by the petitioner,
the requirement of statute stands fulfilled. Deprivation of property
(freezing of bank account) otherwise being as per law, the
argument that Article 300-A of Constitution is violated cannot be
accepted. Contrary view taken by learned Single Judges of the
High Courts of Delhi, Madras and Telangana in the judgments in
Ms Swaran Sabharwal Versus Commissioner of Police, 1990 (68)
Comp Cas 652 Delhi (DB); Muktaben M.Mashru Vs. State of N.C.T.
of Delhi and Another; Crl M.C. 4206 of 2018, decided on
29.11.2019; Tmt.T. Subbulakshmi Vs. The Commissioner of Police;
Crl. O.P. No.13103 of 2013 decided on 30.08.2013; Uma
Maheshwari Vs. The State Rep. By Inspector of Police, Central
Crime Branch, Egmore, Channai; Criminal O.P. No.15467 of 2013
decided on 20.12.2013; The Meridian Educational Society Vs. The
State of Telangana; Writ Petition No.21106 of 2021 decided on
04.10.2021 without considering and dealing with the provisions and
scheme of the Code cannot be relied upon. Therefore these
judgments can not be of any help to the petitioner. The Judgment,
in the case of Chief Information Commissioner and another Versus
State of Manipur and another (Supra), relied by learned counsel for
the petitioner, is also not applicable in the facts and circumstances
of the present case.
(21) In view of the discussions made above this court is of the
considered opinion that there is no infringement of Constitutional
right of property of the petitioner under Article 300-A of the
Constitution of India. Article 300-A of the Constitution of India only
provides that no person shall be deprived of his property save by
authority of law. The alleged deprivation of property (freezing of
bank account) since is found to be in accordance with applicable
law i.e. Code of Criminal Procedure, the action complained of is
clearly in consonance with Article 300-A of the Constitution of India.
Petitioner's plea of violation of Article 300-A of Constitution of India
cannot be pressed to impeach the act of freezing of bank account
after such act is held to be as per applicable law i.e. the Code of
(22) The bank account of the petitioner has been got freezed in
exercise of powers given under Section 102 Cr.P.C. and the Code
of Criminal Procedure restricts the release of such bank account
only to an order passed by the Magistrate, which is not the case
here. The provisions of the Code thus cannot be by-passed on the
plea that Article 300-A of Constitution of India is violated. Merely
because the freezing of bank account is not reported forthwith and
reported only on an application moved by the petitioner, it cannot
be said that there is infringement of right of property given under
Article 300-A of the Constitution of India. The plea of the petitioner
in this regard is misconceived and not sustainable. The writ petition
consequently lacks merit and is dismissed. No order is passed as
Keeping in mind the aforesaid judgment and order dated 18.04.2022
(supra) and also considering the facts and circumstances of the case, this
Court is in full agreement with the view expressed by the Co-ordinate
Bench of this Court at Allahabad vide judgment and order dated
18.04.2022 passed in Criminal Writ Petition No. 11201 of 2021 : Amit
Singh Vs. State of U.P. and others.
The writ petition lacks merit and is, accordingly, dismissed in terms of the
judgment and order dated 18.04.2022 (supra).