1.      These are four writ petitions filed challenging the imposition of fine
of Rs.500/-, on the Petitioners, for non – wearing of face masks while
travelling alone in a private car. The brief facts of each of the cases are
captured below.
2.      In W.P.(C) 6595/2020, the Petitioner’s case is that he is a practicing
advocate for the last 20 years. On 9th September, 2020, at about 11.00 A.M.,
he was driving a Honda City DL 13CC 1479, and was stopped by the police
near Geeta Colony, New Delhi. It is not disputed that he was travelling alone
in his car. After the car was stopped, an Executive Magistrate, along with a
Police Constable and a Delhi Police Inspector, informed the Petitioner that a
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                              Page 2 of 32
fine of Rs. 500/- is being imposed on him for not wearing a mask in a public
place. The Petitioner challenged such imposition of fine before the officials,
on the ground that since he was travelling alone in his car, the said car does
not constitute a public place and would be a private zone. Accordingly, it is
prayed that the challan bearing challan no. 2993, dated 9th September, 2020,
be quashed and the amount of Rs. 500/- be refunded. In addition,
compensation of Rs.10,00,000/- is sought on the ground of alleged mental
harassment publicly caused to the Petitioner.
3.      In W.P.(C) 8455/2020, the facts are that the Petitioner is a lawyer who
was stated to be on his way to his chambers at Tis Hazari Courts, around
12.00 noon on 9th August, 2020. He was driving his privately owned car, a
Maruti Suzuki Swift and was stopped near Aruna Asaf Ali Hospital, Rajpur
Road, Civil Lines by the Police. The Petitioner was in his car travelling
alone, with his mask hanging on his face, from one of his ears. The case of
the Petitioner is that since he was in his car alone, he had not put the face
mask on and that he had intended to wear the mask as soon as he stepped out
of the car. It is highlighted that the four windows of the Petitioner’s car were
closed. When the police official stopped his car, he was informed that the
non-wearing of mask by him is in violation of the Delhi Epidemic Diseases
(Management of COVID-19) Regulations, 2020 (hereinafter referred to as
‘the Regulations of 2020’) and a sum of Rs. 500/- was imposed on him as
fine. In this petition, apart from quashing of challan bearing challan no. A-
22062, dated 9th August, 2020, a declaration is sought to the effect that
privately owned cars are private places for the purpose of the Regulations of
2020. Apart from refund of the amount of Rs. 500/- paid by the Petitioner as
fine, a compensation of Rs. 5,00,000/- is sought in the present petition for
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                           Page 3 of 32
mental harassment.
4.      The Petitioner in W.P.(C) 8588/2020 is also a practicing advocate
who states that he was crossing Vikas Marg area near Laxmi Nagar Metro
Station on 20th August, 2020 in his privately owned car, with all windows of
the car closed. However, officials of the Delhi Police stopped his car on the
ground that he was not wearing a face mask in his car. Similarly, an amount
of Rs. 500/- was imposed on him as fine for violations of the Regulations of
2020. In this case, a direction is sought that the Respondent-Authorities
ought not to fine people for not wearing a face mask while in their own car.
Refund of Rs. 500/- is sought, along with compensation of an unascertained
5.      In W.P.(C) 9408/2020, the Petitioner is a lawyer stated to be
practicing at Karkardooma Courts, New Delhi. On 25th October, 2020, he
was travelling in his i-10 Grand bearing no. DL8CAE1725, along with his
wife and had reached a spot in front of the of D.C. Office, Nand Nagri at
about 1.50 P.M. It is stated that a Civil Defence Personnel forced him to stop
his car. After the Petioner’s car was stopped, the Civil Defence Personnel,
along with a member of the Enforcement Team of SDM, Shahdara,
informed him that since he is not wearing a face mask but only a cotton
safa/dupatta/scraf around his mouth and nose, he would be liable to pay a
fine of Rs. 500/-. In this petition also, quashing of the challan dated 25th
October, 2020 is prayed for. Along with the quashing of the challan, a
refund of Rs.500/- paid as fine is prayed for, as also compensation of Rs.
10,00,000/- for the harassment and insult allegedly caused to the Petitioner,
and for alleged misuse of legal provisions to exhort Rs. 500/- from the
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                         Page 4 of 32
6.      From the facts of the above four cases, it is clear that in two of the
cases, the Petitioners were not wearing any face masks; in one of the cases
case, the Petitioner had a mask which was dangling from one of his ears;
and, in the fourth case, the Petitioner was not wearing a mask, but was
wearing a safa/dupatta/scraf covering his nose and mouth.
7.      The questions which arise in these writ petitions are three-fold. First,
whether it is compulsory for persons driving alone in their own private cars
to wear face masks and the manner in which such masks ought to be worn.
Secondly, if as per the various guidelines, orders and notifications issued,
the fine imposed on the Petitioners is valid and legal.            Thirdly, if any
compensation is liable to be granted.
8.      On behalf of Petitioner in W.P.(C) 6595/2020, Mr. Mittal, ld. Senior
Counsel submits that the challan for Rs.500/- issued to the Petitioner has
been signed by the Executive Magistrate, is without any authority of law.
He relies upon the Regulations of 2020 and an Order dated 8th April, 2020
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the April Order’) issued by the Delhi Disaster
Management Authority (hereinafter referred to as ‘DDMA’), as also a
notification dated 13th June, 2020, , issued by the Lt. Governor of Delhi, in
exercise of powers under Section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897
(hereinafter referred to as ‘EDA’), and also in view of the guidelines issued
by the DDMA (hereinafter referred to as ‘the June Notification’).
9.      The distinction sought to be made is that while as per the April Order,
any person moving around in his own personal vehicle ought to wear a mask
compulsorily, the said condition does not exist in the subsequent June
Notification. He further submits that, as the phrase ‘public place’ is not
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 5 of 32
defined in the June Notification, the contents of the April Order cannot be
read into the said Notification.
10.     He seeks to distinguish the present case from the facts and
circumstances involved in the judgement of the Supreme Court in Satvinder
Singh @ Satvinder Singh Saluja & Ors. v. State of Bihar, [(2019) 7 SCC
89, decided on 1st July, 2019] by submitting that the definition of ‘public
place’ in the said judgement was clear and the definition was an inclusive
one. However, such a definition does not exist in the present April Order or
June Notification. Reference is made to paras 21, 22, 23 and 24 of the said
11.     Broadly therefore, Mr. Mittal’s submission is that the private car
cannot be considered as a public place. Even the definitions of ‘public place’
from any other enactment, such as Section 3(l) of the Cigarettes and
Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of
Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 and
other Acts cannot be read into those orders passed under the EDA. This
EDA ought to have defined ‘public place’ specifically.
12.     He submits that the date of the incident being 9th September 2020, the
June Notification would be relevant and not the April Order. He further
submits that Regulations of 2020 have been enacted under the EDA which
confers no power on the Lieutenant Governor to issue the said
Regulations. Moreover, the vesting of power with the Executive Magistrate
has been done by an order dated 15th July 2020, which was issued by the
SDM, Headquarters. He submits that the power of the SDM does not include
the power to delegate authority under the applicable orders/notification. He
submits that under subordinate legislation, it is impermissible to impose
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                           Page 6 of 32
such fine until and unless the main statute vests the power in the appropriate
authority. Since, under Section 3 of the EDA, the offence of disobeying any
regulation or order made under the EDA is punishable under Section 188 of
the IPC, they have to be read together, with Section 195 of the Cr.P.C which
requires a complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some
other public servant to whom he is administratively subordinate for a Court
to take cognizance of an offence under Section 188 of the IPC. In the
absence of such a complaint, imposition of such a fine cannot be sustainable
under the EDA. Thereafter, Mr. Mittal, has taken the Court through the
various provisions of the EDA to argue that there is no power vested in the
magistrate to impose a fine of this nature.
13.     Mr. Farman Ali, ld. counsel appearing for the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Union of India submits that ‘Public Health and Sanitation’
falls in List 2 of the VII Schedule of the Constitution of India and therefore,
the exclusive responsibility is of each State. He submits that insofar as the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is concerned, it has not issued any
guidelines directing people to wear masks while driving alone in a vehicle.
Insofar, as the implementation of the guidelines issued in respect of disaster
management is concerned, the same is implemented in the local context by
the State Executive Committee (hereinafter referred to as “SEC”) under
Disaster Management Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as ‘DMA’) itself.
14.     Mr. Sudesh Kumar, Petitioner appearing in person in W.P.(C) 9408,
submits that he was wearing a cotton scarf around his mouth and nose while
he was travelling in his car. Despite the same, he has been fined with
Rs.500/-. He refers to the challan imposed on him, dated 25 th October, 2020
which does not mention as to what was the offence for which he was fined.
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 7 of 32
Moreover, he submits that the person who issued the challan had a booklet
of challans, which was signed by District Magistrate without any name,
time, vehicle number and place being mentioned. Such issuance of the
signed booklet by the District Magistrate is contrary to law, which could
lead to harassment.
15.     Mr. Devesh Singh, ld. ASC appearing for the GNCTD submits that
the April Order and the June Notification have both been issued under the
DMA and EDA. Insofar the April Order is concerned, under Section
22(2)(c) of DMA, the SEC has the power to issue guidelines in various
forms in order to ensure non-spreading of disease and mitigation of disease.
He submits that the guidelines, thus, are issued in exercise of power under
Section 22 of the DMA. Thus, they are with authority of law. The
guidelines contained in the April Order, are clear to the effect that any
person moving round in his personal vehicle must be wearing a mask.
Violation of this would be punishable under Section 188 of IPC.
16.     According to Mr. Devesh Singh, ld. ASC, the June Notification is in
addition to the April Order passed by the DDMA. Such notification, apart
from being under EDA and DMA, has been issued by Lieutenant
Governor. Under this notification, the power to impose a fine for the
violation of the Regulations of 2020 is delegated to the Sub Divisional
Magistrate and District Magistrate to ensure that no member of the public
flouts the detailed guidelines, which were issued from time to time by the
DDMA. The Sub Divisional Magistrate would include the Executive
Magistrate, who acts for or/and on behalf of the District Magistrate. He
submits that wearing of a face mask is compulsory even as per this
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                        Page 8 of 32
17.     Insofar the delegation of powers under the said notification is
concerned, the said June Notification does not authorize the Executive
Magistrate to act on behalf of the District Magistrate. Authorization is
merely to impose the fine and take penal action in accordance with the
Regulations, 2020. The Executive Magistrate can exercise the powers of the
District Magistrate and the same is in accordance with law.
18.     A perusal of the impugned challan shows that the same has been
signed by the Executive Magistrate and is, thus, within the powers as
delegated under the notification dated 15th July, 2020. Finally, it is submitted
that the public place would be any place where the public have access.
Reliance has been placed upon paragraph 2 of Satvinder Singh [Supra].
19.     Ld. counsel also refers to the various other statutes, which have been
set out in the rejoinder filed by the Petitioner, to show the definition of
‘public place’. Primarily, the statutes have only one common thread i.e.,
places to which the public have access, would constitute a ‘public place’.
Reference is made to specific Explanation A to Section 133 of the CrPC,
which would also show that wherever the public can travel and have access,
which would constitute a ‘public place’. Thus, the Executive Magistrate’s
order deserves to be upheld.
20.     Mr. Sanjay Ghose, ld. ASC adopts the arguments of Mr. Devesh
Singh and further submits that while interpreting the various orders and
notifications issued under the DMA and EDA, the Court would bear in mind
the purpose of issuance of the such a notification/order. The purpose is to
curb the spreading of disease. The intention behind the April Order and June
Notification ought to be given effect to and the same ought not to be
interpreted in a narrow manner.
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                           Page 9 of 32
21.     Ms. Shobhana Takiar, ld. counsel appearing for the GNCTD places
reliance upon Section 2 of the EDA, which empowers the State Government
to prescribe temporary regulations to be observed by the public during times
threatened by the outbreak of any dangerous epidemic diseases, which is
deemed necessary to prevent the outbreak or spread of such disease.
22.     Mr. Aditya Kaushik, appearing in person in W.P.(C) 8455/2020
submits that in this case the final challan was issued by the Sub-Inspector
and hence, a police official. He relies upon the FAQs downloaded from
National Health Mission website to argue that the insofar as wearing of
mask is concerned, the FAQs, in fact, state that only if a person is ill, or
looking after someone who is showing symptoms of COVID-19, they should
wear a mask. Otherwise, the FAQs advice not to waste masks. Finally, he
submits that order dated 3rd September, 2020 of the DDMA, states that bars
would be allowed to be opened on a trial basis. Mr. Kaushik argues that in
case bars are allowed to be opened, people would be consuming alcohol in
such bars. Consequently, they would be removing their masks to do so, in a
crowded place. Hence, penalty being imposed on a person not wearing a
mask while travelling alone in a vehicle stands no logic. At this point, Mr.
Devesh submits that, as per the Regulation 3(g) of the Regulations, 2020, a
Sub-Inspector is an authorised person to impose fine.
23.     From the submissions made herein above, broadly three issues arise –
i. What is the ambit of the power to issue guidelines under the
ii. Whether under the guidelines which have been issued under the April
Order by the DMA and June Notification, wearing of face masks is
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                       Page 10 of 32
compulsory even when an individual is travelling in a privately owned
car. If so, in what manner is the face mask to be worn?
iii. Whether the Executive Magistrates who have issued the challans and
imposed the fines of Rs. 500/- each were properly authorised in law?
24.      The EDA is a statute enacted for the purposes of better prevention of
the spread of dangerous epidemic diseases. Though, the said Act had been
enacted almost 130 years ago, there have been amendments made to it from
time to time. However, with the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic,
various provisions were introduced by the Epidemic Diseases (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2020 and thereafter the amending Act 34 of 2020, which came
into effect on 22nd April, 2020.
25.      Under the EDA, Sections 2 and 2A confer powers on both the State
Government and the Central Government, respectively, to prescribe such
regulations as may be necessary for both the purposes of the prevention of
disease, as well as, the spread of disease. The said regulations once
prescribed would have to be observed by the public or any persons or class
of persons upon whom the same are imposed. The violation of regulations
prescribed either by the State Governments or the Central Government
results in penal consequences as given under Section 3 of the EDA. Under
Section 2A of the EDA, the Central Government also takes certain measures
in respect of vehicles such as buses, trains, goods vehicles, ships, vessels,
aircrafts etc. for the purpose of preventing the outbreak of disease or the
spread thereof. The relevant provisions of the EDA read as under –
“2.       Power to take special measures and prescribe
regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease.
(1) When at any time the (State Government) is
satisfied that (the State) or any part thereof is visited
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                           Page 11 of 32
by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous
epidemic disease, the (State Government), if (it) thinks
that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time
being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may
take, or require or empower any person to take, such
measures and, by public notice, prescribe such
temporary regulations to be observed by the public or
by any person or class of persons as (it) shall deem
necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or
the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner
and by whom any expenses incurred (including
compensation if any) shall be defrayed.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing provisions, the (State
Government) may take measures and prescribe
(b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or
otherwise, and the segregation, in hospital, temporary
accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by
the inspecting officer of being infected with any such
disease.
When the Central Government is satisfied that India or
any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an
outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease and that
the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in
force are insufficient to prevent the outbreak of such
disease or the spread thereof, (the Central Government
may take such measures, as it deems fit and prescribe
regulations for the inspection of any bus or train or
goods vehicle or ship or vessel or aircraft leaving or
arriving at any land port or aerodrome, as the case
may be, in the territories to which this Act extends and
for such detention thereof, or of any person intending
to travel therein, or arriving thereby, as may be
necessary.)”
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                           Page 12 of 32
26.     The DMA contemplates the establishment of the National Disaster
Management Authority, the State Disaster Management Authority as also,
the State Executive Committee and the District Management Authority.
These bodies are vested with various powers under the Act for the
management of disasters. Under Section 24 of the DMA, the State Executive
Committees have various powers and functions that can be taken for
preventing or combating disruptions or dealing with effects of any
threatening disaster situation.
27.     Under Section 35 of the DMA, the Central Government is empowered
to take all such measures as it deems necessary for the purpose of disaster
management. Similarly, powers have also been vested with every Ministry
or Department of Government of under Sections 36 and 37 of the DMA.
28.     Under Section 38 of the DMA, the State Government shall take
measures as may be required for the purpose of disaster management.
Similarly, all Departments and Ministries of the State are also vested with
various powers and functions.
29.     In the background of the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the
DDMA issued April Order dated 8th April 2020. In the said order, the
following measures were directed for being observed by the members of the
threatened with the spread of COVID-19 epidemic,
which has already been declared as a pandemic by the
World Health Organisation and has considered it
necessary to take effective measures to prevent its
And whereas, Govt. of India has notified lockdown all
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                       Page 13 of 32
over India, including the territory of NCT of Delhi,
w.e.f. 25'" March, 2020 till midnight of 14'" April,
And whereas, Delhi Disaster Management Authority
has issued various orders/ instructions from time to
time to all concerned authorities to take all required
measures to appropriately deal with the situation;
And Whereas, it is imperative to strictly observe the
lockdown and isolation measures to contain the
spread of COVID-19 in NCT of Delhi.
And whereas it has been observed in some studies that
wearing of facial masks can reduce the spread of
corona virus substantially, from and to persons coming
in contact with each other, apart from compulsory
social distancing measures.
And whereas it has become imperative that in the
larger public interest, wearing of mask by any person
who is moving in any public place is essential.
Now, therefore, in exercise of powers conferred under
Section 22 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, the
undersigned, in his capacity as Chairperson, State
Executive Committee. GNGTD, hereby directs the
1. All persons moving for whatsoever purpose and
under whatever reason/authority in public places, like
street, hospital, office, markets must wear 3-ply mask
or cloth mask compulsorily.
2. Any person moving around in his personal and
official vehicle must be wearing there masks
compulsorily.
3. Any person working at any site/office/workplace
must wear the masks as mentioned above.
4. No person/officer will attend any meeting/gathering
without wearing these masks as mentioned above.
5. These masks may be standard mask available with
the chemist or even homemade washable masks and
can be reused after proper washing and disinfecting
them.
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 14 of 32
It shall be the responsibility of the employer to ensure
that his/her employees wear the 3-ply mask or cloth
mask without fail.
Anybody violating these instructions will be punishable
under the section 188 of Indian Penal Code (48 of
1860) and will be strictly penalised. These instructions
must be followed very scrupulously.”
30.     Thereafter vide the June Notification dated 13th June, 2020, the
Regulations of 2020 were notified. As per the said Regulations, ‘Authorised
Persons’ under the EDA included the District Magistrate and wearing of
face masks/cover was made compulsory in all public place/work places. The
operative portion of the said notification are set out below: -
Whereas, the COVID-19 outbreak has been notified as
a “Disaster” being a critical medical condition and
pandemic situation under the “Disaster Management
And whereas the Delhi Disaster Management Authority
has issued detailed guidelines from time to time to
And whereas, instances have come to notice that above
guidelines are not being followed in their letter and
And whereas, rising numbers of COVID-19 cases in
NCT of Delhi warrant stricter compliance with the
Various directives issued by the Central Government
and the Government of NCT of Delhi from time to time,
pursuant to guidelines of National Disaster
Management Authority and the Delhi Disaster
And whereas, to enforce these directives, it has now
become imperative to impose penalties by way of fines
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred
under Section 2 of The Epidemic Disease Act, 1897
and also in view of the guidelines issued by Delhi
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 15 of 32
Governor, Delhi is pleased to issue the following
1. These regulations shall be called The Delhi
Epidemic Diseases, (Management of COVID-19)
2. “Epidemic Disease” in these regulations shall mean
3. “Authorised Persons” under this Act shall and
b. Director General Health Services (DGHS), GNCTD;
e. Sub Divisional Magistrate (SDM) and District
Department of Health & Family Welfare, Government.
Of NCT of Delhi, District Magistrates and Zonal
Deputy Commissioners of respective Municipal
g. And the officers of the rank of Sub Inspector and
above of Delhi Police.
h. The above Authorized Persons shall be empowered
to impose a fine of Rs. 500/- for the first time and a
further fine of Rs. 1000/- for the repeated offence,
respectively for violating the directives/guidelines
a. Observation of quarantine rules.
c. Wearing of Face mask/cover in all public places
d. Prohibition of spitting in public places.
e. Prohibition on consumption of paan, gutka, tobacco
etc in public places.
5. In case any person fails to pay the penalty on the
spot, action under Section 188 IPG shall be taken
against him by the authorised police officer on receipt
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                         Page 16 of 32
of a complaint from any Authorised Persons or on his
6. Protection to Authorized Persons under the Act: No
legal suit or proceedings shall lie against the
Authorized Persons for anything done or intended to
be done in good faith for ensuring the stricter
compliance under these regulations unless proved
malafide/otherwise.
7. These regulations shall come into force immediately
and shall remain valid for a period of one year from
the date of publication of this notification.
31.     After the issuance of the April Order, as also the Regulations of 2020,
various SDMs/DMs, in exercise of their powers under Regulation 3(f) of the
Regulation of         2020,     delegated  powers   to Executive           Magistrates,
empowering such Executive Magistrates to impose fines, under Regulation
3(h) of the Regulations of 2020. One such order dated 15th July, 2020 issued
by the SDM, East, empowering the Executive Magistrates of the East
District, New Delhi to impose fine is set out below: -
“In exercise of powers conferred under Regulation 3
(f) of “The Delhi Epidemic Diseases (Management of
19/prescribe/13087-336 dated 13.06.2020, all the
Executives Magistrates of East District are hereby
authorized to impose fine and take penal action as
envisaged under the aforesaid Regulations.
This has the approval of District Magistrate (East).”
32.     The three questions that have arisen are to be, accordingly,
determined in the background of the above Orders and Notifications passed
by the appropriate authorities.
33.     A perusal of the provisions of EDA and DMA shows that the central
and state governments are vested with broad powers as under:
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 17 of 32
•       To take all necessary steps for the purpose of ensuring
prevention of the outbreak of any pandemic or further spreading of
such pandemic.
•       To take any steps for mitigation of the effects of any pandemic
or disaster.
•       To take all necessary measures to prevent disaster from taking
place.
•       To take all steps necessary for the effective response during the
impending disaster.
•       To work in close corporation with each other right from the
various administrative levels at the Central Government, State
Governments, District Authorities and Local Authorities.
•       To allocate funds required for taking such necessary steps.
•       To consistently maintain a state of preparedness for dealing
with outbreak of any pandemic or disaster.
•       To provide for necessary relief measures in case of a outbreak
of any pandemic or disaster.
34.     The roles and functions of different authorities are enumerated under
the various provisions of the DMA. The consequences of non-compliance
under both the statutes, i.e., EDA and DMA, are also provided for. Both the
statutes empower the enactment of regulations for the purpose of giving
effect to the provisions of these two Acts.
35.     In the present case, this Court is concerned with the April Order
issued by the DDMA and the Regulations of 2020, as extracted above. The
April Order specifically records that the spread of the Coronavirus can be
reduced substantially by wearing of face masks. In view of this, it stipulates
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                            Page 18 of 32
that wearing of face masks/covers is mandatory for any person moving in a
public place. The April Order also specifically directs that any person
moving around in a personal or official vehicle has to compulsorily wear a
face mask. The Regulations of 2020 record that wearing of face masks or
covers is compulsory in all public places and work places. Submission of the
Petitioners is that in the April Order, a specific direction existed for
compulsorily wearing a face mask while in a personal or official vehicle and
the same is conspicuously absent in the Regulations of 2020.
36.     The wearing of a mask is in the nature of a measure which is
necessary for controlling the spread of the Coronavirus and the directions in
respect of wearing of face masks can clearly be issued under the provisions
of the EDA and the DMA. The April Order thereafter, followed by
Regulations of 2020 emphasised this fact very clearly. The distinction
sought to be made by the Petitioners between the language of the said Order
and Regulations is a narrow one. The April Order and the Regulations of
2020 have to be interpreted in the context and background of the pandemic,
and not in isolation thereof.
37.     Immediately upon the outbreak of the pandemic, globally as well as
nationally,      scientists,     researchers, international organizations                 and
governments emphasised the importance of wearing facial masks to control
the spread of the disease. In the absence of a complete definitive cure, the
world continues to wrestle with the pandemic. The challenge of the
pandemic was enormous at the outbreak of the same and even with the
introduction of a few vaccines, the emphasis continues to be laid on wearing
of face masks. The wearing of masks is necessary irrespective of whether a
person is vaccinated or not. The following material establishes the
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 19 of 32
uniformity        with       which      face     masks       were     being          prescribed              as
preventive/mitigating measures against the spread of the pandemic.
•     The World Health Organisation (hereinafter referred to as ‘WHO’)
recommended the wearing of face masks in its advisories1 updated from
time to time. The relevant portion of the said advisory released by the
suppress transmission and save lives; the use of
adequate level of protection against COVID-
If COVID-19 is spreading in your community,
stay safe by taking some simple precautions,
such as physical distancing, wearing a mask,
into a bent elbow or tissue. Check local advice
storage and cleaning or disposal of masks are
possible.”
•     The Government of India has also endorsed the usage of face
masks to combat the spread of SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus. It
released a manual on 30th March, 2020 on how to use face
masks effectively, which also discussed usage of homemade
All about masks in the context of COVID-19, Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public:
When and how to use masks, World Health Organisation, available at
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                                          Page 20 of 32
face masks.2 The relevant portion of the manual released by
droplets still in the air from an infected person.
Reducing the chances of inhaling the virus by
thoroughly using a combination of approaches
alcohol, will be vital to stopping its spread.
outline of best practices to make, use and reuse
masks to enable NGOs and individuals to self-
create such masks and accelerate widespread
Access to Materials, Easy of Making at Home,
Ease of Use and Reuse.
Wearing of masks is especially recommended
for people living in densely populated areas
across India.
and nose and there is no gap between your face
and the mask. When wearing the mask, the side
downwards.”
•     Several researches have been undertaken in the wake of the
Masks for Curbing the Spread of SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus Illustration by MoHFW:A manual on
homemade masks, the Office of the Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India, 30th March,
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                                           Page 21 of 32
pandemic. One such research article3 published by the New
England Journal of Medicine details the benefits of wearing a
face mask towards protection against the spread of the
disease. The relevant portion of the said research article is as
“As SARS-CoV-2 continues its global spread, it’s
possible that one of the pillars of Covid-19 pandemic
control — universal facial masking — might help
reduce the severity of disease and ensure that a greater
proportion of new infections are asymptomatic. If this
hypothesis is borne out, universal masking could
become a form of “variolation” that would generate
immunity and thereby slow the spread of the virus in
the United States and elsewhere, as we await a
vaccine.
One important reason for population-wide facial
masking became apparent in March, when reports
started to circulate describing the high rates of SARS-
CoV-2 viral shedding from the noses and mouths of
patients who were presymptomatic or asymptomatic —
shedding rates equivalent to those among symptomatic
patients. Universal facial masking seemed to be a
asymptomatic infected people. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) therefore recommended
on April 3 that the public wear cloth face coverings in
areas with high rates of community transmission — a
recommendation that has been unevenly followed
across the United States.
Past evidence related to other respiratory viruses
indicates that facial masking can also protect the
wearer from becoming infected, by blocking viral
particles from entering the nose and mouth.
Monica Gandhi and George W. Rutherford, Facial Masking for Covid-19 — Potential
for “Variolation” as We Await a Vaccine, N Engl J Med 2020, October, 2020, available
at https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp2026913?query=featured_coronavirus
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                             Page 22 of 32
Epidemiologic investigations conducted around the
world — especially in Asian countries that became
accustomed to population-wide masking during the
2003 SARS pandemic — have suggested that there is a
strong relationship between public masking and
demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 infections decreased
among health care workers after universal masking
was implemented in municipal hospitals in late
The material that supports the wearing of the mask for effectively tackling
the corona virus is thus, well established.
38.     While interpreting the April Order, the June Notification and
Regulations of 2020, the above background needs to be kept in mind. The
April Order 2020 makes it unequivocally clear that any person moving in a
personal or official vehicle “must” wear masks “compulsorily”. This Order
does not distinguish between whether the person is travelling alone or with
any other occupants in the car. Considering the manner in which the virus
can spread, when the car is occupied by more than one person, there can be
no doubt that masks ought to be worn by each of the occupants. Since the
occupants of a car could be persons who may have been exposed to the virus
at any point in time and may be temporarily occupying the car, the fact that
they would be sitting in an enclosed space, especially with windows rolled
up makes them extremely vulnerable if they do not wear the masks. Thus,
multiple occupants in a car, in any personal or official vehicle would have to
compulsorily wear the masks.
39.     The question raised is as to whether if a person is travelling alone in a
car, should he/she wear a mask. According to ld. counsel for the Petitioners,
the Regulations of 2020 are in contrast with the April Order. While the
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                           Page 23 of 32
April Order specifically prescribed that wearing of face masks in vehicles is
necessary, the Regulations of 2020 generally deals with wearing of face
masks or cover in public places. It is sought to be argued that since a car
occupied by one person would not be a public place and hence a mask need
not be worn.
40.     This interpretation given to the April Order and the Regulations of
2020 is not tenable. A perusal of the Regulations of 2020 shows that the
State Government issued the said Regulations to ensure stricter compliance
of the various directives of the Central Government and State Governments.
The said directives were a consequence of the guidelines under the National
Disaster Management Act (“NDMA”). The Regulations of 2020 specifically
state that they are being issued “to enforce the directives” and “to impose
penalties by way of fines for a deterrent effect”. The June Notification
issuing the Regulations of 2020 is not in supersession of the earlier
directives, including the April Order. It is merely in continuance and to
ensure stricter compliance of the earlier directives. Thus, the Regulations of
2020 ought not to be read in isolation, but rather along with the earlier
directives, as also for stricter enforcement of the earlier directives issued by
the various authorities including DDMA, NDMA, State Government and
41.     Under the Regulations of 2020 the epidemic disease was defined as
‘COVID -19 (Corona Virus Diseases 2019)’. Various authorised persons
were empowered to impose fines. The definition of ‘Authorised Persons’
was inclusive in nature and included the following:
“3. “Authorised Persons” under this Act shall and
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 24 of 32
b. Director General Health Services (DGHS), GNCTD;
e. Sub Divisional Magistrate (SDM) and District
Department of Health & Family Welfare, Government.
Of NCT of Delhi, District Magistrates and Zonal
Deputy Commissioners of respective Municipal
g. And the officers of the rank of Sub Inspector and
above of Delhi Police.
h. The above Authorized Persons shall be empowered
to impose a fine of Rs. 500/- for the first time and a
further fine of Rs. 1000/- for the repeated offence,
respectively for violating the directives/guidelines
a. Observation of quarantine rules.
c. Wearing of Face mask/cover in all public places
d. Prohibition of spitting in public places.
e. Prohibition on consumption of paan, gutka, tobacco
etc in public places.”
42.     A perusal of Regulation 3(h) of the Regulations of 2020 extracted
above shows that (a) to (e) under Regulation 3(h) merely mention the
categories of directions/guidelines and do not explain the manner, in which
these guidelines are to be followed. The use of term ‘quarantine rules’,
‘social distancing’, ‘spitting in pubic places’, ‘consumption of paan gutka
tobacoo in public places’ and above all, ‘wearing a face mask or cover in
public places/workplaces’ have been listed as guidelines/directives, which
are to be enforced by the Authorised Persons recognised therein. The
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                         Page 25 of 32
manner, in which these guidelines/directives are to be adhered to, has not
been expanded in the Regulations of 2020. In order to determine whether
there is proper adherence to the directives/guidelines, one would have to
refer back to relevant guidelines/directives where the said aspects have been
elaborated upon.
43.     Insofar as wearing of face masks or cover in all public places/work
places is concerned, the specific office order dealing with these
guidelines/directives is the April Order. This order, clearly, specifies the
type of mask that should be worn, i.e., a three-ply mask or cloth mask,
standard mask available with the chemist or homemade washable mask,
which can be reused after proper washing and dis-infecting. In the case of
workplaces, the responsibility to ensure wearing of masks is that of the
44.     The April Order also prescribes that wearing of masks by any person,
who is moving in any public place is essential. It also provides that all
persons, irrespective of the purpose, in a public place, like a street, hospital,
office, market, must wear a mask. A person in a personal or official vehicle
is to also directed to compulsorily wear a mask.
45.     A lot of vehement arguments have been heard that a private car with a
single person may not constitute a public place. The question as to what
constitutes a public place cannot be universally set in stone. ‘Public place’
may be defined differently in various enactments, depending on the context.
For example, under the Motor Vehicle Act, public place is defined as under:
“‘public place’ means a road, street, way or other
place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which the
public have a right of access, and includes any place or
stand at which passengers are picked up or set down by
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 26 of 32
a stage carriage”
46.     Various other enactments also define ‘public place’ in different
contexts. Some of the definitions of ‘public place’ which may be found in
• The Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 reads as:
“2(h) “public place” means any place intended for use
by, or accessible to, the public and includes any public
conveyance;”
• The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 reads as:
“133. Conditional order for removal of nuisance.
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this
section shall be called in question in any Civil Court.
Explanation- A “public place” includes also property
belonging to the State, camping grounds and grounds
left unoccupied for sanitary or recreative purposes.”
•    In the Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places Rules, 2008 the
“2. Definitions: In these Rules, unless the context
(d) public place defined in section 3(1) of the Act shall
also include work places, shopping malls, and cinema
halls.”
• The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 reads as:
“43. Power of seizure and arrest in public place. – Any
officer of any of the departments mentioned in section
(b) detain and search any person whom he has reason to
believe to have committed an offence punishable under
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                         Page 27 of 32
this Act, and if such person has any narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance or controlled substance in his
possession and such possession appears to him to be
unlawful, arrest him and any other person in his
company. Explanation – For the purposes of this
section, the expression "public place" includes any
public conveyance, hotel, shop, or other place intended
for use by, or accessible to, the public.”
47.     A perusal of above definitions shows, itself, shows that the term
‘public place’ varies from statute to statute, and context to context.
48.     Further, the Supreme Court also has examined the scope of the term
‘public place’ in Gaurav Jain v. Union of India, [(1997) 8 SCC 114]. The
Supreme Court, while discussing the scope of the term ‘public place’ has
held that for a place to fall within the purview of this term, it need not be
public property and could even be private property which is accessible to the
49.     The High Court of Kerala has also discussed the scope of the term
‘public place’ in the judgment of Malathi v. State of Kerala [2002 SCC
OnLine Ker 308, decided on 14th August, 2002] and observed that the
term ‘public place’ has to be understood in the larger context.
50.     Thus, the word ‘public place’, has to be interpreted in this case in the
context of the COVID pandemic. To determine what constitutes a `public
place’ the manner in which the Coronavirus can spread is the crucial part. It
is now settled and accepted universally that the corona virus spreads through
droplets either through breathing of a person or from the mouth. The risk of
exposure increases multiple times if a person comes into contact with a
person who is infected and is not wearing a mask.
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 28 of 32
51.     The moot question to ask is, therefore, whether a person travelling
alone in a moving car or vehicle can be exposed to other persons and if the
answer to this in an affirmative, then the car or private vehicle would be a
public place for the purpose of the present case. A person travelling in a
vehicle or car even if he is alone, could be exposed to the virus in various
ways. The person may have visited a market, or workplace, or hospital or a
busy street, prior to entering the car or vehicle. Such person may be required
to keep windows open for the purposes of ventilation. The vehicle may also
be required to be stopped at a traffic signal and the person could purchase
any product by rolling down the window. The person may thus, be exposed
to a street side vendor. If a person is travelling in the car alone, the said
status is not a permanent one. It is merely a temporary phase. There could be
other occupants in the car prior to the said phase and post the said phase.
There could be elderly family members or children who may be picked from
the school or even simply friends or colleagues may travel in the car in the
immediate future. Such persons can also be exposed to the virus if the
occupant was not wearing the mask. The droplets carrying the virus can
infect others even after a few hours after the occupant of the car has released
the same. There are several possibilities in which while sitting alone in the
car one could be exposed to the outside world. Thus, it cannot be said that
merely because the person is travelling alone in a car, the car would not be a
public place.
52.     A mask is a `Suraksha kavach’ for preventing the spread of the corona
virus. It protects the person wearing it, as also the persons to whom the
person is exposed. Since the inception of the pandemic, wearing of masks
has been one measure that has saved millions of lives. In fact, wearing of a
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 29 of 32
mask even in one’s own homes is encouraged if there are elderly persons or
persons suffering from co-morbidities. A vehicle which is moving across the
city, even if occupied at a given point in time by one person, would be a
public place owing to the immediate risk of exposure to other persons under
varying circumstances. Thus, a vehicle even if occupied by only one person
would constitute a ‘public place’ and wearing of a mask therein, would be
compulsory. The wearing of a mask or a face cover in a vehicle, which may
be occupied by either a single person or multiple persons is thus, held to be
compulsory in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
53.     The last question that has been raised is in respect of exercise of
powers. A perusal of Regulations of 2020 shows that authorised persons
under the Regulations would include a District Magistrate, Sub-Divisional
Magistrate, any officer of health department, who may be authorised, or of
the State Government. It also includes officials, who hold the position of a
Sub-Inspector or above, in the Delhi Police. In the present case, the challans
have been issued either by the District Magistrate or by the Executive
Magistrate or by the Sub-Inspector concerned. For example, in the East
district, the Executive Magistrate has been duly authorised by the District
Magistrate to issue challans vide order dated 15th July, 2020 issued by the
SDM, Headquarters, East. The definition of authorised persons being
inclusive and expansive in nature, District Magistrates are also vested with
powers to further authorise any officers to issue challans.
54.     The above list of officers, who were authorised is broad and in the
opinion of this court it has to be interpreted expansively and not
restrictively. Further, in so far as delegation of powers is concerned, the
Supreme Court in The Inspector General of Registration, Tamil Nadu and
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                          Page 30 of 32
Ors. v. K. Baskaran, [AIR 2020 SC 3194, dated 15th June, 2020] has
observed that when practical necessities or exigencies of administration
require that the decision-making authority who has been conferred with
statutory power, then such authorities be able to delegate tasks when the
situation so requires. The relevant portion of the judgment is as under:
‘14. The following principles can thus be culled out
(i) A statutory functionary exercising a power
cannot be said to have delegated his functions
merely by deputing a responsible and competent
official to enquire and report, as that is the ordinary
mode of exercise of any administrative power;
(ii) If a statutory authority empowers a delegate to
undertake preparatory work, and to take an initial
decision in matters entrusted to it, but retains in its
own hands the power to approve or disapprove the
decision after it has been taken, the decision will be
held to have been validly made if the degree of
control maintained by the authority is close enough
for the decision to be regarded as the authority's
(iii) Even in cases of sub-delegation, so long as the
essential function of decision making is performed
by the delegate, the burden of performing the
ancillary and clerical task need not be shouldered
by the primary delegate and it is not necessary that
the primary delegate himself should perform the
(iv) Practical necessities or exigencies of
administration require that the decision-making
authority who has been conferred with statutory
power, be able to delegate tasks when the situation
55.     In the context of the pandemic and wearing of face masks being
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                           Page 31 of 32
compulsory, all requisite measures have to be taken by the authorities for
enforcement of the same. An interpretation that furthers the purpose of
prevention of the disease and controlling the spread of the disease will
commend with the Court rather than the opposite. The challans have been
issued by duly authorised officers. The prayer for quashing of the challans
is thus not sustainable.
56.     This Court would also like to add that all the four Petitioners in these
cases, being advocates/lawyers ought to recognise and assist in
implementation of measures to contain the pandemic, rather than
questioning the same. Advocates as a class, owing to their legal training
have a higher duty to show compliance especially in extenuating
circumstances such as the pandemic. Wearing of masks cannot be made an
ego issue. Compliance by advocates and lawyers would encourage the
general public to show greater inclination to comply. The duty of advocates
and lawyers is of a greater magnitude, especially in the context of the
pandemic for enforcement of directives, measures and guidelines issued
under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 and the Disaster Management Act,
57.     In view of the above, this Court does not find any merit in the writ
petitions. The petitions are accordingly dismissed.
W.P.(C) 6595/2020 & connected matters                                         Page 32 of 32