1.     The present Revision Petition has been filed, challenging the
order dated 04.07.2018, passed by the Principal Judge, Family Court,
East District, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi wherein respondent no. 2
was directed to pay revised maintenance of Rs. 6,000/- (Rupees Six
Thousand only) per month to the petitioner.
2.     The brief facts leading to the present petition are as under:
a)      The marriage of the petitioner/wife was solemnized with
respondent no.2 as per Hindu rituals on 06.12.1992. Out of the
wedlock, a son was born on 20.09.1993.             Disputes arose
between the petitioner and respondent no.2 herein, and
subsequently the petitioner filed a petition under Section 125
of Code of Criminal Code, 1973 (Cr.P.C.) for grant of
maintenance. By virtue of order dated 14.10.1998 learned
Metropolitan     Magistrate      (MM)     directed    respondent
no.2/husband to pay maintenance in sum of Rs.450/- per
month to petitioner and Rs.350/- per month to the son.
(b)     On 24.09.2007, the petitioner filed an application under
Section 127 Cr.P.C. before the Learned MM. An ex parte order
was passed in the absence of respondent no. 2, wherein the
learned MM enhanced the maintenance to Rs. 2200/- per
month, for both the petitioner as well as the son. The ex parte
order was challenged by respondent no.2 under Section 126 of
Cr.P.C., however, the application was dismissed. The said
order was challenged by respondent no. 2 vide order dated
13.5.2010 wherein the Learned Appellate Court remanded
back the case to the learned MM with direction to decide the
application on merit and till the said application was decided,
interim maintenance was awarded as per order dated
(c)     Consequently, both the parties were heard afresh on
application under Section 127 of Cr.P.C. and by judgment
dated 20.01.2011, the application was allowed. The learned
MM granted maintenance of Rs. 2,200/- per month to
petitioner/wife and Rs.2,000/- per month to the son from the
date of filing of petition till the date of order. Commencing
from the date of the order, enhanced maintenance of Rs.3,000/-
per month to the petitioner/wife and Rs.2,500/- per month to
the son was awarded.
(d)     Since there was increase in the income of respondent
no.2 in February 2018, the petitioner/wife filed another
application u/s 127 Cr.P.C., praying for enhancement of
maintenance vide the impugned order dated 04.07.2018
respondent no.2 was directed to pay maintenance of Rs.6,000/-
per month to the petitioner from the date of the impugned
order during her lifetime or till she gets remarried. The
impugned order dated 04.07.2018 reads as under:-
“...14. Apart from vague allegations of the
respondent, which have been denied by the petitioner
No.1, there is no evidence to show that petitioner
No.1 is working anywhere or there has been change
in circumstances on this aspect since the earlier
orders were passed under sections 125 Cr. P.C. and
127 Cr.P.C. Thus the petitioner No.1 would remain
eligible for the maintenance. The respondent has not
been able to discharge the burden to show that the
petitioner No.1 is having any other income. Even
assuming for the sake of the argument, that petitioner
No.2 is working in a Mall as alleged by the
respondent, that fact would have no bearing on the
liability of the respondent to maintain petitioner
No.1. Petitioners have also not been able to show
that the respondent has any income salary from
15.      The present petition was filed in July 2014.
The respondent is working as a Pump Driver (E&M)
with Delhi Jal Board. Recent salary slip (Ex.RWl/2)
of the respondent for the month of February 2018 is
on record which shows that the respondent is in
receipt of following emoluments per month:-
1.      Basic salary               35300
This salary slip of the respondent also records the
deductions which are as follows: -
In the circumstances, carry home salary of the
respondent is shown as Rs. 29,955/-.
16. The deduction towards GPF loan referred in the
pay slip is in the context of a loan of Rs. 1,03,000/-
taken by the respondent. This loan has apparently
been taken by the respondent recently as no such
loan is mentioned in the salary slips of the
respondent for the months of April to June, 2015
which are also on record, in addition the respondent
is getting deducted an amount of Rs.5000/- per
months towards GPF. Having regard to the totality of
the facts and circumstances, the net carry home
income of the respondent after making allowance for
reasonable deductions towards income tax, GPF etc
is assessed at Rs.35,000/- per month.
17. After the petitioner No.2 attained the age of
majority, there would be four dependents on this
income of the respondent: the respondent himself,
petitioner No.1, the subsequent wife of the
respondent and the daughter born from the
subsequent wedlock to the respondent. Hence, as per
the normal practice on the subject and the judgment
of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Anurita Vohra vs.
Sandeep Vohra 110 (2004) DLT 546, this income
would have to be divided in five shares. Two shares
would be retained by the respondent being the
earning member and one share each would go to the
remaining dependents. However, perusal of record
would show that the respondent is the only son of his
parents and he has liability to maintain his father
who is 79 years of age and a divorcee sister. In this
view of the matter, the respondent is directed to pay
Rs.6000/- per month from the date of this order
during her life time or till she gets remarried...”
(e)      It is this order dated 04.07.2018 that is under challenge
in the instant revision petition.
3.     It is stated by the Ld. Counsel for the petitioner that respondent
no.2 has been directed to pay maintenance from the date of the order,
however, as per mandate of law, as laid down in the case of Rajnesh
Vs. Neha; (2021) 2 SCC 324, he should have been directed to pay
maintenance from the date of filing of the maintenance petition. It is
also stated that the maintenance order should have been passed on the
basis of Annual Return filed before the Income Tax Authorities by
respondent no.2.
4.     Learned Counsel for respondent no.2 stated that the learned
Trial Court could not have given maintenance from the year 2011
since it is an application for enhancement of the maintenance already
granted, and the enhanced maintenance could be granted only from
the date, on which the salary of the respondent was enhanced.
5.     To decide the merits of this case, it is imperative to understand
the objective that is to be fulfilled by way of Section 125. Section
125 reads as below:
“…125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and
parents.—(1) If any person having sufficient means
neglects or refuses to maintain—
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether
married or not, unable to maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married
daughter) who has attained majority, where such child is,
by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury
unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such
neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly
allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child,
father or mother, at such monthly rate 66[* * *], as such
Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as
the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a
minor female child referred to in clause (b) to make such
allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate
is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if
married, is not possessed of sufficient means:
67[Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the
pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly allowance
for the maintenance under this sub-section, order such
person to make a monthly allowance for the interim
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother,
and the expenses of such proceeding which the Magistrate
considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person
as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly
allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses for
proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as
possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of
the service of notice of the application to such person.]
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of
the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875), is deemed not to
have attained his majority;
(b) “wife” includes a woman who has been divorced by, or
has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not
remarried.
68[(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim
maintenance and expenses for proceeding shall be payable
from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date
of the application for maintenance or interim maintenance
and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.]
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause
to comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for
every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the
amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and
may sentence such person, for the whole or any part of
each month's 69[allowance for the maintenance or the
interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the
case may be,] remaining unpaid after the execution of the
warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month or until payment if sooner made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery
of any amount due under this section unless application be
made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of
one year from the date on which it became due:
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his
wife on condition of her living with him, and she refuses to
live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds
of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this
section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that
there is just ground for so doing.
Explanation.—If a husband has contracted marriage with
another woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be considered
to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live with him.
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an 70[allowance for
the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses
of proceeding, as the case may be,] from her husband
under this section if she is living in adultery, or if, without
any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband,
or if they are living separately by mutual consent.
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has
been made under this section is living in adultery, or that
without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her
husband, or that they are living separately by mutual
consent, the Magistrate shall cancel the order…”
6.     Objective of Section 125 Cr.P.C. can be understood from
catena of judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. The purpose of
the provision is to safeguard the wife from financial suffering due to
lack of money. The aim is to ensure that the wife does not undergo
financial hardship and is rather able to enjoy the same status and
comfort as enjoyed by her husband. Further, the objective behind
granting maintenance is not to punish a person but rather support the
relations who have a moral right to be supported. Thus, a benevolent
end is envisaged to be achieved. Another objective of Section 125 is,
to compel those who are bound in law and by moral duty, to support
those who are unable to support themselves. A similar view has been
taken in the case of Captain Ramesh Chander Kaushal v. Mrs.
Veena Kaushal and Ors. 1979 Cri LJ 3 where it was held that if a
provision falls within the constitutional sweep of Article 15(3),
reinforced by Article 39 of the Constitution of India, 1950 the
endeavour shall be to protect and ensure social justice towards
women and children.
7.     It is to be noted that maintenance is neither alms nor lottery.
The most important precondition for Section 125 to become operative
is the condition that the wife is unable to maintain herself and that the
husband has neglected or refused to maintain his wife.
8.     In Bhagwan v. Kamla Devi 1975 CriLJ 40, it was observed
that the wife should be in a position to maintain a standard of living
which is consistent with the status of her marital family, neither
luxurious nor penurious in comparison.
9.     In Bhagwan Dutt v. Kamla Devi (1975) 2 SCC 386, the Apex
Court observed the object of Section 125 Cr.P.C. that:
“…19. The object of these provisions being to prevent
vagrancy and destitution, the Magistrate has to find out
as to what is required by the wife to maintain a standard
of living which is neither luxurious nor penurious, but is
modestly consistent with the status of the family. The
needs and requirements of the wife for such moderate
living can be fairly determined, only if her separate
income, also, is taken into account together with the
earnings of the husband and his commitments…”
10.    A Division Bench of the Apex Court laid down the objective
of Section 125 Cr.P.C in the case of Chaturbhuj vs. Sita Bai 2008
CriLJ 727. It was held by the Apex Court as below:
“...The object of the maintenance proceedings is not to
punish a person for his past neglect, but to prevent
vagrancy by compelling those who can provide support
to those who are unable to support themselves and who
have a moral claim to support. The phrase "unable to
maintain herself" in the instant case would mean that
means available to the deserted wife while she was
living with her husband and would not take within itself
the efforts made by the wife after desertion to survive
somehow.
Section 125 Cr.P.C. is a measure of social justice and is
specially enacted to protect women and children and as
noted by this Court in Captain Ramesh Chander
Kaushal v. Mrs. Veena Kaushal and Ors.
MANU/SC/0067/1978 : 1979CriLJ3 falls within
constitutional sweep of Article 15(3) reinforced by
Article 39 of the Constitution of India, 1950 (in short the
'Constitution'). It is meant to achieve a social purpose.
The object is to prevent vagrancy and destitution. It
provides a speedy remedy for the supply of food,
clothing and shelter to the deserted wife. It gives effect
to fundamental rights and natural duties of a man to
maintain his wife, children and parents when they are
unable to maintain themselves. The aforesaid position
was highlighted in Savitaben Somabhai Bhatiya v. State
of Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0193/2005 : 2005 CriLJ
11.    Another important aspect of the case before this bench is
further governed by the provisions of Section 127 of Cr.P.C. which
reads as follows:
“… 127. Alteration in allowance.—73[(1) On proof
of a change in the circumstances of any person,
receiving, under Section 125 a monthly allowance
for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or
ordered under the same section to pay a monthly
allowance for the maintenance, or interim
maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as
the case may be, the Magistrate may make such
alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the
maintenance or the interim maintenance, as the case
(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in
consequence of any decision of a competent civil
court, any order made under Section 125 should be
cancelled or varied, he shall cancel the order or, as
the case may be, vary the same accordingly.
(3) Where any order has been made under Section
125 in favour of a woman who has been divorced by,
or has obtained a divorce from, her husband, the
Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied that—
(a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce,
remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her
(b) the woman has been divorced by her husband
and that she has received, whether before or after
the date of the said order, the whole of the sum
which, under any customary or personal law
applicable to the parties, was payable on such
divorce, cancel such order,—
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such
order, from the date on which such order was made,
(ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the
period, if any, for which maintenance has been
actually paid by the husband to the woman;
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her
husband and that she had voluntarily surrendered
her rights to 74[maintenance or interim
maintenance, as the case may be,] after her divorce,
cancel the order from the date thereof.
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery
of any maintenance or dowry by any person, to
whom a 75[monthly allowance for the maintenance
and interim maintenance or any of them has been
ordered] to be paid under Section 125, the civil
court shall take into account the sum which has been
paid to, or recovered by, such person 76[as monthly
allowance for the maintenance and interim
maintenance or any of them, as the case may be, in
pursuance of] the said order.”
12.    An application under Section 125 acts as the prequel to an
application under Section 127. Only once an application has been
filed under Section 125 and a maintenance amount has been granted,
can an application under Section 127 be claimed for alteration of the
maintenance so awarded. It is worthwhile to mention that Section 127
has no independent standing without Section 125.
13.    The objective is to ensure that fair share according to changed
income or changed circumstances is granted to the wife. In case the
income of husband has increased or decreased, the amount of
maintenance has to be modified accordingly. It is to ensure that if
income has decreased, the husband is not put to any hardship. In case
the income has increased, it ensures that wife receives fair share
according to increased income of husband. Similarly, income of wife
can also be considered if it accrues after grant of maintenance under
Section 125 Cr.P.C. The assessment and apportionment of the
maintenance has to be done as per the Judgment of Rajnesh Vs.
Neha; (2021) 2 SCC 324 while deciding maintenance under Section
14.    It is clear from a plain reading of sub-section (1) of Section
127 Cr.P.C. that it is a provision for increase or decrease of
maintenance as granted under Section 125, consequent upon any
change in the circumstances of the parties concerned at the time of
filing of application for alteration/modification of the original order
of maintenance. It means that it must be shown by the party
concerned that there has been a change in the circumstances of either
the husband or of the wife.
15.    Section 127 is dependent upon Section 125 and for an order to
be passed under Section 127, as discussed above, it has to flow from
the original order passed under Section 125.
Change in circumstance in context of Section 127 of Cr.P.C.
16.    The term „change in circumstances‟ as referred to in Section
127(1) not only include a change in the financial circumstances of the
husband but may also include other circumstantial changes in the
husband or wife‟s life which may have taken place since the time
maintenance was first awarded. The quantum of maintenance fixed
by a court does not become unalterable in perpetuity. The same may
be altered and is subject to increase or reduction by the courts,
pursuant to an alteration in the circumstances of either party. Thus,
Rise in the income of the husband can, therefore, be a valid change of
circumstances falling within the ambit of Section 127 sub-section (1)
of Cr.P.C.
17.    In furtherance, it is vital to mention that the circumstances
contemplated under Section 127 (1) include the financial and other
circumstances of not only the husband but also will extend to the
change in financial and other circumstances of the wife. It may
therefore be concluded that increase in the income of the husband
becomes a significant criterion to alter maintenance for the wife.
18.    Further change of circumstances may not only be in terms of
financial capability but also added financial burden on the petitioner.
It may also be in terms of sufficient income accruing to the wife to
maintain herself or both of them being relieved of a financial burden.
19.    The term “dependency” has been explained in the Oxford
Learners dictionary as “the state of relying on someone or something
for something, especially when this is not normal or necessary”.
Further, Black‟s law dictionary explains the term as “A relation
between two persons, where one is sustained by another or looks to
or relies on aid of another for support or for reasonable necessaries
consistent with dependent's position in life.” and the term „dependent‟
has   been      explained  as   “One    who    derives   support     from
another”. These definitions are to be read in light of Indian culture
which champions togetherness amongst family members. The
affection shared by family members culminates into bonds and
family members are the strongest support system of each other. In
particular, the relationship between a brother and a sister has a deep
sense of care towards one another. Festivals, norms and traditions in
India are an affirmation and recognition of care, affection and
responsibility of siblings towards each other.
20.    In the present case, respondent no. 2 has a dependent father,
who is 79 years of age, and a divorced sister. There is no skepticism
about the fact that the sister receives maintenance from her husband,
but the brother, as discussed above, cannot be a mute spectator to her
misery if and when she needs his help. Some provision needs to be
made in his list of expenditure to support her sibling.
21.    Furthermore, it is the duty of the son/daughter to take care of
his/her parents during the golden days of their life. The father of
Respondent no. 2 is a non-earning member of the family who should
enjoy his old age seeing his family happy. Thus, to make sure that the
son is able to fulfil the wishes and wants of the father during his
golden years, it becomes vital to consider some amount as
expenditure for looking after and well-being of his father while
determining the amount of maintenance. Relationships cannot be
caged in a mathematical formula alone in every case. Each case has
to be decided in view of its special and peculiar circumstances which
may warrant indulgence of the Court. No doubt in cases involving
grant of maintenance calculation has to be made in terms of financial
capacity, the same needs to be done keeping in mind all family
circumstances.
22.    In the present case, the learned counsel for the petitioner
contends that a divorced sister cannot be held to be dependent on the
petitioner. In my opinion, this stand is meritless to the extent that in
India, the bond between siblings and their dependence on each other
may not always be financial but it is expected that a brother or sister
will not abandon or neglect his or her sibling in time of need. I
completely agree with the learned counsel for the respondent that the
petitioner‟s divorced sister for claim for her maintenance and
dependence can file a case against her husband. However, it has not
been made clear in the present case as to whether the divorced sister
of the respondent is receiving any maintenance or is being
maintained by her husband or not. It is also not clear as to whether
she is able to maintain herself as no argument has been put forth
before this Court and it also does not find any mention in the
judgment of the learned Trial Court. Therefore, I am of the view that
though the divorced sister can legally and morally claim maintenance
from her husband, the respondent, at the same time, must be spending
and is expected to spend some amount for his sister on special
occasions and in case of any emergent need. Therefore, though while
apportioning the income of the respondent, one portion of income of
the respondent cannot be apportioned to the sister, some amount as
expenditure on yearly basis has to be kept aside for the divorced
sister as moral obligation of the respondent. The plea of the petitioner
that no amount should be considered to be spent on the divorced
sister is meritless especially in the Indian context and the peculiar
circumstances of the present case.
23.    The counsel for the petitioner was not able to point out as to
whether the 79 years‟ old father of the respondent is not being
maintained by respondent or is able to maintain himself having some
income of his own. It is the moral and legal duty of the respondent to
look after his father in the golden years of his life and ensure every
comfort and support to him as „He is because of Him‟. I, therefore,
am of the opinion that in absence of any proof of independent income
of the father, at this stage, the respondent must be spending some
amount on looking after his father. The learned Principal Judge of
Family Court has rightly held the same.
24.    The father of the respondent may not be present before the
Court to ask for maintenance, there is no argument or proof of his
being independent or having financial resources to maintain himself.
This Court still has to appreciate that even though he has not
appeared before this Court it cannot be denied that he has to depend
on his son at the age of 79. The father may not have considered filing
case for maintenance before a Court of law. At times, parents may
feel sad and inferior even at the thought of being maintained by their
child and asking for maintenance. Their love and affection for their
child is so overpowering that they may decide to live uncomfortably
but not ask for maintenance. Parents want to feel independent as they
don‟t live with their children, their children live with them. With
these thoughts in mind, I hold that the needs of the father are not
many as he is staying with the respondent but a certain amount of
expenditure must be apportioned for his needs.
25.    In the present case, the total of income of the respondent has
been shown as Rs. 49,407/- and the deductions have been shown as
Rs.19,452/-. After deductions the net carry on salary will come to
Rs.29,955/-.      The learned Trial Court has rightly held that the
deduction of Rs. 5,000/- towards recently taken personal loan cannot
be considered as deduction as it is for his personal benefit and not
mandatory statutory deduction; the total carry on home salary will
thus come to about Rs. 35,000/- per month.
26.    The Apex Court in the matter of Kulbhushan Kumar vs. Raj
Kumari and Others        (1970) 3 SCC 129 while adjudicating         the
deductions that can be made from the income of the husband before
awarding maintenance, observed as below:
“…19. It was further argued before us that the High Court
went wrong in allowing maintenance at 25% of the income
of the appellant as found by the Income-tax Department
assessment proceedings under the Income-tax Act. It was
contended that not only should a deduction be made of
income-tax but also of house rent, electricity charges, the
expenses for maintaining a car and the contribution out of
salary to the provident fund of the appellant. In our view
some of these deductions are not allowable for the purpose
of assessment of "free income" as envisaged by the
Judicial Committee. Income-tax would certainly be
deductible and so would contributions to the provident
fund which have to be made compulsorily. No deduction is
permissible for payment of house rent or electricity
charges. The expenses for maintaining the car for the
purpose of appellant's practice as a physician would be
deductible only so far as allowed by the income-tax
authorities i.e. in case the authorities found that it was
necessary for the appellant to maintain a car…”
27.    A similar view was taken in the case of Nitin Sharma and
Others vs. Sunita Sharma & Others (2021 III AD (Delhi) 210),
wherein a bench of this Hon‟ble Court was pleased to hold as under:
“…24. In the opinion of this Court, while calculating the
quantum of maintenance, the income has to be ascertained
keeping in mind that the deductions only towards income
tax and compulsory contributions like GPF, EPF etc. are
permitted and no deductions towards house rent, electric
charges, repayment of loan, LIC payments etc. are
permitted. On this aspect, the pertinent observations of
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dr. Kulbhushan Kunwar v. Raj
Kumari MANU/SC/0349/1970 : (1970) 3 SCC 129, which
have been followed by a Bench of Punjab & Haryana High
Court in Seema & Anr. Vs. Gourav Juneja, are as under:-
"…12. Section 125 Cr.P.C. stipulates that if any person
having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain
his wife, his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, who
are otherwise unable to maintain themselves, shall be
obligated to do so. A moral duty and a statutory
obligation is cast upon the husband to maintain his
wife, minor children, parents who otherwise are not
capable of maintaining themselves. A person cannot be
permitted to wriggle out of his statutory liability by
way of availing huge loans and reducing a substantial
amount of his salary for repayment of the same every
month. Deductions that are made from the gross salary
towards long term savings, which a person would get
back at the end of his service and such as deductions
towards Provident Fund, General Group Insurance
Scheme, L.I.C. Premium, State Life Insurance can be
deemed to be an asset that he is creating for himself. In
arriving at the income of a party only involuntary
deductions like income tax, provident fund contribution
etc. are to be excluded. Therefore, such deductions
cannot be deducted or excluded from his salary while
computing his "means" to pay maintenance. In the case
of Dr. Kulbhushan Kunwar v. Raj Kumari
(SC) 234 while deciding the question of quantum of
maintenance to be paid, the argument raised that
deduction not only of income-tax but also of house
rent, electricity charges, the expenses for maintaining
a car and the contribution out of salary to the
provident fund of the appellant was not allowed. Only
deductions towards income-tax and contributions to
provident fund which had to be made compulsorily
were allowed. The relevant portion of Dr. Kulbhushan
Kunwar's case (supra) reads as under:--
"19. It was further argued before us that the High
Court went wrong in allowing maintenance at 25% of
the income of the appellant as found by the Income
Tax Department in assessment proceedings under the
Income Tax Act. It was contended that not only
should a deduction be made of income-tax but also of
house rent, electricity 20-11-2021 (Page 5 of 8)
www.manupatra.com Ishaan Sharma charges, the
expenses for maintaining a car and the contribution
out of salary to the provident fund of the appellant. In
our view some of these deductions are not allowed for
the purpose of assessment of "free income" as
envisaged by the Judicial Committee. Income Tax
would certainly be deductible and so would
contributions to the provident fund which have to be
made compulsorily. No deduction is permissible for
payment of house rent or electricity charges. The
expenses for maintaining the car for the purpose of
appellant's practice as a physician would be
deductible only so far as allowed by the income-tax
authorities i.e. in case the authorities found that it
was necessary for the appellant to maintain a car..."
13. In a nutshell, a husband cannot be allowed to shirk his
responsibility of paying maintenance to his wife, minor
child, and parents by availing loans and paying EMIs
thereon, which would lead to a reduction of his carry home
(emphasis supplied)
28. The son of the respondent from the present petitioner has already
attained majority and, therefore, the respondent would have 4
dependents on his income i.e. the respondent himself, the petitioner
in this case, the subsequent wife and the daughter born from the
subsequent wedlock, apart from some expenditure on his father and
his divorced sister. Therefore, the income would have to be divided
into 5 shares, two shares to be allocated to the respondent as being
the earning member and one share each to the remaining dependents.
29.    In view of the peculiar circumstances of this case, wherein
respondent no. 2 has remarried after divorce with the Petitioner and
has a child from the wedlock, there exists a need to strike a balance
between the sensitive and delicate situation of the respondent towards
the petitioner and the child from their wedlock, as well as the
subsequent marriage and child.
30. Therefore, as per calculation even if five shares are apportioned
about Rs. 8,000/- can be apportioned to the petitioner in the present
case. However, considering the circumstances regarding the
dependence of aged father of the respondent on respondent and other
circumstances mentioned above and making a provision for that
approximately Rs.7,500/- will come to share of all the dependents. In
these circumstances, in my opinion, ends of justice will be met in
case the amount of maintenance is enhanced from Rs. 6,000/- to Rs.
7,500/- per month from the date on which the respondent received his
first enhanced salary, which according to the learned Trial Court is
February, 2018 and has not been disputed either by the petitioner or
by the respondent. The maintenance cannot be enhanced from the
date of the application as the present petition is under Section 127
Cr.P.C. wherein, the maintenance amount has to be decided on the
basis of the date on which the salary of the husband had changed.
31. The petition along with pending application stands disposed of in
above terms.