1. CM (M) 47/2022 has been filed challenging the impugned order dated
22.12.2021 passed by learned Judge, Family Court, South-East District,
Saket in Guardianship Petition no.8/2021 titled as “Abhishek Ahuja v. Aditi
Bakht” insofar as restrain the petitioner from removing her minor child,
namely, Anaaya Ahuja from Delhi. A further prayer has been made that
order dated 21.08.2021 also be quashed insofar as it restrains the petitioner
from removing the minor child Anaaya Ahuja from Delhi. The petitioner has
also prayed for transfer of the proceedings in Guardianship Petition
no.8/2021 titled as “Abhishek Ahuja v. Aditi Bakht” and all pending
applications therein pending before Sh.Sanjeev Kumar Singh, learned Judge,
Family court, South-East District, Saket to any other court. A prayer has also
been made for the release of Canadian passport bearing no.GA340868 held
by the petitioner and Canadian passport bearing no. AM039545 held by the
Petitioner‟s minor daughter Anaaya Ahuja.
2. While this petition was pending, the learned Judge, Family Court
decided the Guardianship Petition No.8/2021 titled as “Abhishek Ahuja v.
Aditi Bakht” vide order dated 04.03.2022 and granted the following
rights/access to the respondent father with the minor child:
(i) The applicant/petitioner shall have visitation rights with the minor child
on every Wednesday and Friday at his parents' home from 3.00 p.m. to 6.00
(ii) The applicant/petitioner shall also be entitled to overnight stay of minor
child Anaaya at his parents' home on every 2nd and 4th Sunday. On every 2nd
and 4th Saturday, the applicant shall take custody of the minor child Anaaya
CM(M) 47/2022 & CM(M) 211/2022 Page 2 of 10
from the respondent/mother at 10.00 a.m. in the morning and shall handover
custody of the minor child to non-applicant/ respondent on every 2nd and 4th
Sunday at 6.00 p.m. respectively.
(iii) During long holidays, vacations extending more than two weeks, the
minor child shall remain to be in the custody of the applicant/petitioner and
his parents for three days and the petitioner shall also be entitled to travel
outside Delhi along with the minor child likewise the respondent shall also
be entitled to travel outside Delhi alongwith the minor child on such
holidays/vacations when the minor child shall remain in the custody of the
respondent.
(iv) During summer vacations, the minor child shall remain to be in the
custody of the applicant/petitioner and his parents for a period of 15 days as
per the convenience of the child and the petitioner will also be entitled to
travel outside Delhi alongwith minor child. Here it is also ordered that
during summer vacations when the minor child shall remain in the custody
of the respondent, she will also be entitled to travel outside Delhi along with
the minor child.
(v) On festivals, the petitioner shall be at liberty to get the minor daughter
from 1.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m.
(vi) On minor daughter's birthday, the petitioner shall be at liberty to get the
minor daughter from 2.30 p.m. to 6.30 p.m. On petitioner's birthday,
petitioner's family's birthday, the petitioner shall be at liberty to get the
minor daughter for four hours as per the convenience of the child.
(vii) The petitioner and his family members shall also be at liberty to drop,
accompany and pick the child to and from her school on Thursday.
CM(M) 47/2022 & CM(M) 211/2022 Page 3 of 10
(viii) The petitioner shall also be permitted to attend all the
meetings/occasions/celebrations at the minor daughter's school including but
not limited to parent-teacher meeting. The respondent shall share all the
communications from the minor daughter's school including but not limited
to the curriculum, school schedule etc.
(ix) The petitioner shall also be entitled to have interaction through video
call with the minor child for atleast 30 minutes everyday as per convenience
of the child.
3. The petitioner mother aggrieved of this filed CM(M) No.211/2022
challenging the impugned order predominantly on the ground that the
impugned order dated 04.03.2022 focused solely on the rights of the father
and his family ignoring the comforts of the minor child. It has been stated
that the minor child has lived alone with the mother since she was 18
months old and is heavily dependent on her mother and has never been
separated from her. The child has slept in the same bed as her mother since
she was a few weeks old and still wakes up frequently at night looking to her
mother for comfort. The petitioner has stated that separating the minor child
from the mother for overnight visitation or vacation is sudden, drastic and
would have a negative impact on the psyche and comfort of the minor child.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted even if the court
considers increasing the father‟s visitation for the summer vacation, the
overnight visitation ought not to be granted keeping in mind that the minor
daughter is still short of three years. It has further been stated that visitation
rights may be granted keeping in view the weekly schedule of the summer
classes and respondent father may attend classes with the child to ensure
stability for the child.
5. The plea of the petitioner is that the Family Court vide impugned
order 21.08.2021 had restrained the petitioner from removing the minor
child from Delhi till the next date of hearing and this was not extended
beyond 28.10.2021 and therefore stood lapsed. The grievance of the
petitioner is that learned Judge Family court vide order dated 22.12.2021
would not have restored it without passing a fresh order imposing any travel
restriction on the petitioner. The petitioner has narrated several incidents
regarding the apprehension of bias which is not being narrated in detail
herein.
6. Ms.Geeta Luthra, learned senior counsel assisted by Ms.Asmita
Narula, advocate for the respondent husband has submitted that that the
learned Judge, Family court has after taking into account the entire facts and
circumstances and law on the point has granted visitation right vide a well-
reasoned order after due application of judicial mind and there is no cause of
interference in the same in absence of any perversity/illegality in the same.
It has been submitted that the father has been the primary care giver and has
co-parented the daughter since her birth being a hands-on father and has
been actively involved in every minute of the daughter‟s life-changing
diapers, feeding, playing, reading books, bathing, etc. It has been submitted
that the father can be granted overnight visitation (2 nd and 4th weekends and
vacations) in terms of the Visitation Order as he can evidently take care of
the daughter‟s routine and also put her to sleep.
7. I have heard learned counsel for both the parties and perused the
record.
8. In the present case, the grievances of the petitioner mother is that the
learned Judge, Family court has shared his personal mobile number with the
CM(M) 47/2022 & CM(M) 211/2022 Page 5 of 10
parties during the proceedings and the respondent father had met the judge
unilaterally in his chamber. This has created an apprehension in the mind of
the petitioner mother. This court also considers that it was not advisable for
the learned judge, Family Court to have shared his personal mobile number
with the parties. It is a settled proposition that justice must not only be done
but must also appear to have been done. The conduct of the judge while
conducting the judicial proceedings should be above board.
9. The petitioner had sought the transfer of the case from the learned
judge, Family court to any other court. It is pertinent to mention here that
divorce petition between the parties bearing SMA No.07/2022 is pending
before the learned Principal Judge, Family court, South-East District, Saket.
It is also pertinent to mention here that Guardianship Petition no.8/2021 has
finally been decided which is also under challenge before this Court in the
present proceedings. This court is conscious of the fact that the transfer of a
case from one court to another is a pretty serious matter as it may cast
indirectly doubt on the integrity or competency of the judge from whom the
matter is transferred. The order of transfer should not be done on mere
presumptions and possible apprehensions. Recently, this court in Kinri Dhir
vs. Veer Singh 2022 SCC OnLine Del 1096 dealt with the question of bias
and inter alia held as under:
33. It must at the outset be acknowledged that as family
jurisprudence has progressed over time, the Family Judge is no
longer viewed as one who is to act in the capacity of a mere “fault
finder”. Family disputes are no longer liable to be viewed as purely
adversarial. Our Courts have over time and as society has evolved
over the ages throwing up new challenges along the way,
unequivocally recognised the multi-faceted role that a Family
CM(M) 47/2022 & CM(M) 211/2022 Page 6 of 10
Judge is called upon to perform today including that of facilitator,
counsellor, mediator, taking a pro-active role in exploring and
striving to find common ground, kindle the hope of rapprochement
and guide parties towards finding closure to disputes. Marital
disputes thus require to be resolved with the Family Judge adopting
a more immersive resolution process. The Family Judge is thus
today obliged to don a more collaborative robe and not approach
the lis as just another legal dispute that arrives before a court for
resolution. This unique function which the Family Judge discharges
is required to be approached with empathy bearing in mind that the
problem placed before it is not merely another legal conflict but
one that deals with the complete breakdown of a family impacting
not just the immediate parties to the dispute but various others who
are seared by the pall of discord that follows. It thus places the
Family Judge under the added responsibility of approaching parties
and the issues that arise for determination with compassion,
guiding parties through the entire process in the hope that a just
solution would avoid an irretrievable breakdown of the family itself.
34. More fundamental than the aforesaid introduction is the
necessity to reiterate the traditional role that a Judge is obliged to
discharge. Parties approach courts based on the immense trust and
faith expressed and envisioned in the system itself. The Judge
representing the face of the court system must thus appear to be
just, even handed, independent and neutral. Neutrality is one of the
fundamental attributes of the justice system. This requires the Judge
to consider and weigh each utterance, every word forming part of
the decision ensuring that it embodies and conveys a sense of
fairness and neutrality having informed the decision-making
process. The decision of the Court represents the voice of the court
itself charged with discharging the divine function of rendering
judgment. The observations forming part of the judgment must not
therefore give the impression of being based on personal
assumptions, biases or preconceived notions. Similarly, the
observations as contained in the decision must not have the
potential to sully the person or character of a litigant. The language
of the judgment must necessarily be tempered by restraint and
CM(M) 47/2022 & CM(M) 211/2022 Page 7 of 10
moderation. A judgment of a court of law cannot become a
blistering diatribe against a party or its cause.”
(emphasis supplied)
10. It has to be kept in mind that mere adverse orders are not sufficient to
invoke the power of transfer. The allegation of bias needs to be evaluated
on the premises of reasonable apprehension of bias. It is a settled
proposition that „mere apprehension of bias‟ and not „actual bias‟ may be
sufficient to exercise the power of transfer. This court would restrain itself
from making any comment on the merits of the case. This court has also no
doubt over the integrity, neutrality and Judicial Independence of the learned
11. However, unfortunately on account of the conduct of the judge for
sharing his personal mobile number with both the parties and admittedly
having met one of the party in the chamber has unnecessarily given a cause
of reasonable apprehension of bias. The judges have to remind themselves
time and again that each and every conduct is observed and noted by the
litigants and therefore, knowingly or unknowingly they may not act in any
manner which gives rise to even slightest of doubt in the minds of the
litigants and lawyers.
12. Thus, I consider that the orders dated 21.08.2021, 22.12.2021 and
04.03.2022 are liable to be set aside in the interest of justice and for the
purpose of restoring faith of both the parties in the system of administration
of justice. Thus, both the petitions are disposed of with the following
i. Orders dated 21.08.2021, 22.12.2021 and 04.03.2022 are set
aside.
ii. The Guardianship Petition no.8/2021 is restored to its original
number.
iii. The Principal judge, Family Court, South-East, Saket shall keep
the matter with himself/herself and decide the same in accordance with
law without being influenced by the earlier orders passed by the
learned Judge, Family court, South-East District, Saket and any
expression or observation made by this court.
iv. It is agreed between the parties that till the Guardianship
Petition no.8/2021 is finally decided by learned Principal Judge, Family
Court, the father respondent shall have the visitation rights on every
Wednesday and Friday from 3:00 p.m to 6:00 p.m. with the same
arrangement of picking up and dropping.
v. In addition to that as agreed between the parties, there shall be
eight hours visitation from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on the following dates:
vi. The father shall have also visitation right on the birthday of the
child i.e. 15.06.2022, which incidentally falls on Wednesday for four
hours from 2 p.m. to 6 p.m.
vii. The petitioner mother may travel during the month of June,
2022 along with the child. However, the petitioner mother shall share
the itinerary with the respondent father. If due to such travel any
CM(M) 47/2022 & CM(M) 211/2022 Page 9 of 10
visitation with the father is missed, it shall be compensated in the
(a) One visitation for three hours shall be compensated on 07.07.2022
(Thursday) from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. (respondent‟s father‟s birthday-
Paternal Grandfather‟s Birthday) and other three visitations shall be
compensated on 28.06.2022 (Tuesday) from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
13. The permission to travel to the petitioner mother within country is
only an interim arrangement and this issue shall also be decided finally by
Principal Judge, Family Court along with guardianship petition.
14. The issue of release of the passport of the petitioner mother and
daughter shall also finally be decided by the Principal Judge, Family Court
at the time of final adjudication of the guardianship petition.
15. The principal judge, Family Court is requested to decide the said
guardianship petition as expeditiously as possible preferably within four
weeks. Learned Principal Judge, Family Court may also take assistance of
the Child Counselor and interact with the child before deciding the visitation
rights.
16. Accordingly, both the petitions along with all the pending applications
stand disposed of.
