Argued by : Mr. Randhir Singh Hooda, Advocate for the petitioner.
1.           The present petition raises a challenge to the order dated
01.12.2021 passed by the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Sohna, Gurugram
in case No. NIA/14/2017 titled as “Padam Singh versus Sudhir Kumar”
filed under Section 138 read with Section 141 and 142 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act and under Sections 406 and 420 IPC as also the order dated
18.01.2022 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Gurugram dismissing
the revision petition filed by the petitioner on an application for seeking
permission to engage the Hand Writing Expert.
2.           Learned counsel for the petitioner has impugned the said orders
passed by the Courts below whereby the application of the petitioner for
appointment of a Hand-Writing Expert to obtain expert opinion about
writing on the cheque in question was dismissed.
3.           Learned counsel has argued that the respondent-complainant
had based his complaint alleging therein that the petitioner had issued the
cheque in question on 24.10.2016 for an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- in
discharge of his liability. As a matter of fact, the petitioner had never issued
the said cheque nor there was any liability to be discharged by him. It is
argued that the husband of the petitioner and the respondent were doing
business together and it was at the said relevant period of time that the
petitioner gave the cheque to the respondent as a security for their mutual
transactions and business of property dealing. It is contended that the cheque
in question was not signed by the petitioner and had been handed-over as a
blank cheque. There was no legally enforceable debt.
4.           I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and have gone
through the pleadings of the case and the documents appended therewith.
5.           A perusal of the order passed by the Judicial Magistrate First
Class, Sohna, District Gurugram shows that the following reasons have been
recorded by the learned Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Sohna for
dismissing the application preferred by the petitioner.
“4.   File perused. Present application is filed at
the stage of evidence of defence evidence being last
opportunity. In the present application, applicant has
claimed that there are difference in writing. But there are
no such specific denial of accused regarding his
signature over cheque in question. Statement of accused
under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. was recorded in which it is
claimed by accused that he has issued cheque in question
for security purpose and now no debt is pending qua
accused. When signature over cheque in question has not
specifically denied then there is no question for
appointment of handwriting expert to compare the
handwriting over cheque in question. In M/s Sebro
Machine Tools Pvt. Ltd. case (supra) our Hon’ble High
“dishonour of cheque-Handwriting expert-
petitioner admitted signature but disputed the
handwriting and ink used on blank cheque given-
application for examination of handwriting expert
and for the report of FSL to be rightly dismissed.”
In view of finding of our Hon’ble High Court it is
clear that when accused has admitted his signatures over
cheque in question then there is no ground for taking the report
of handwriting expert regarding handwriting over disputed
cheque. Hence, there is no ground in the application and same
is hereby dismissed.”
6.        Further, the arguments of the petitioner were also noticed by the
Lower Appellate Court and upon consideration thereof, it was decided as
“11. After hearing the arguments and after perusing the
case file, ultimately this court has arrived at the conclusion that
application in hand deserves dismissal. In the present case, it is
the case of the revisionist that he had been throughout denying
his signatures on Cheque Ex.C1 having not been issued by him.
12. Admittedly, no defence evidence has been led in the
present case despite the fact that accused has already availed
twelve effective opportunities for leading evidence in defence
but accused has failed to examine even a single witness in
defence till 22.09.2021 despite last opportunity which indicates
that there is merit in the arguments advanced by the learned
counsel for respondent that the applicant is interested only in
delaying decision of the complaint. A good reason must also be
shown as to why the evidence was not produced during availing
sufficient opportunities for defence evidence and when it was
the last opportunity, then present application was moved.
13. There is hardly any case made out to show that the
evidence sought to be produced at this stage eluded the
applicant earlier despite exercise of due diligence. It appears to
be a crude attempt on the part of the applicant to undo the
findings recorded by the learned trial Court. Further more,
there is no denial of accused regarding his signatures over the
cheque in question and accused in his statement recorded under
Section 313 Cr.P.C has specifically stated that he had issued
the cheque for security purpose. It is not the plea of the accused
that cheque was not signed by him whereas it is the stand of the
accused that cheque was given for security purposes. When
there is no dispute Sudhir Kumar Vs. Padam Singh regarding
signatures of accused over the cheque in question, then
question of appointment of handwriting expert to compare the
handwriting over cheque in question does not arise.
14. The evidence which is required to be led was very
well within the knowledge of the applicant at the time of
defence evidence. No doubt the court is empowered to take any
evideance if it is so required for the just decision of the case but
the applicant-revisionist has not been able to establish that
notwithstanding the exercise of due diligence, the evidence now
sought to be produced was not within the knowledge of the
applicant-revisionist or could not after the exercise of due
diligence be produced by him when the trial was going on. If
such applications are allowed there will be no end to
opportunities for evidence.
7.            A perusal of the aforesaid orders clearly shows that the
petitioner was granted an opportunity to lead defence and as many as 12
effective opportunities have been granted by him. Despite, he failed to
examine even a single witness in defence till 22.09.2021 when last
opportunity was given to him. The petitioner has failed to assign any reason
why no such attempt was made by him when he was granted opportunity for
the same.
8.            Apart therefrom, the petitioner never denied his signatures over
the cheque in question in the statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C and
instead, the affirmative case set up by the petitioner is that the said cheque
had been issued for security purpose. The argument thus sought to be raised
before this Court is not pleaded by the petitioner in his defence. The
petitioner having admitted his signatures on the cheque in question, the
subsequent issue as to who filled up the cheque is to be examined at the time
of final adjudication. The submission raised before this Court is not made
out in the evidence and is thus an after-thought and is apparently intended to
delay the proceedings before the trial Court.
9.            The impugned orders do not suffer from any illegality,
irregularity, perversity or result in failure of justice by non-examination of
the Hand-Writing Expert in the facts of the instant case. Learned counsel for
the petitioner has failed to refer to any provision in law as per which the
handwriting on cheque must necessarily be that of the signatory or to any
judgment that would hold that once the signatures on cheque are admitted,
filing of the cheque in a different handwriting itself would be a sufficient
ground to rule against a cheque having been issued in due course. The entire
evidence has to be seen in light of the defence taken in Section 313 Cr.P.C.
Where the plea raised in the application is not likely to advance any apparent
interest of justice and is an evident attempt to delay the culmination of the
proceedings, such an endeavour needs to be checked.
10.           In view of the facts noticed above, the instant petition is
without any merit and the same is accordingly dismissed.