1.     Challenging the order of proclamation on being declared a proclaimed offender,
the petitioner has come up before this court under section 482 of Code of Criminal
2.     The accused could not be served through the ordinary process, including
summons, bailable warrants, and even non-bailable warrants. The concerned court
finally proceeded against the petitioner under section 82 of CrPC and declared the
petitioner a proclaimed offender vide order dated 28 Aug 2015, passed by Ld. SDJM,
3.     Ld. counsel for the petitioner seeks quashing on the merits. However, in my
considered opinion, the explanation made in paragraph 9 is not at all satisfactory and
needs further clarification. However, the submissions made in paragraphs 10 to 12
need consideration and furthermore the criminal justice system must not hamper and
suffer because of the petitioner. Thus, this court is inclined to grant the following relief,
reserving liberty to raise the remaining prayers, including quashing of FIR registered on
proclamation and also for the quashing of FIR registered on the complaint, either on
merits or on compromise, if such need so arises.
4.     Ld. counsel appearing for the State has strenuously opposed this petition,
including any limited relief.
5.     After careful analysis of the petition, this court is confining the adjudication of
this matter to the extent mentioned herein before, reserving the liberty to the
petitioner as prayed.
6.     The primary object of service is to secure the accused's presence in trial. The
petitioner has approached this court on its own, which establishes the bonafide at this
stage. Without adjudicating the explanation offered and stand taken by the petitioner,
this court, in the exercise of its inherent powers under section 482 CrPC, deems it
appropriate to grant the following limited relief to the petitioner, subject to the
compliance of the conditions mentioned in this order.
7.     In the present case, the maximum sentence imposable for the offences
mentioned in FIR does not exceed seven years. Thus, directions passed in Arnesh
Kumar v. State of Bihar, (2014) 8 SCC 273, (Para 13), apply to this petition, wherein
Hon’ble Supreme Court directed all the State Governments to instruct its police officers
not to arrest the accused automatically when the offence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to
seven years; whether with or without fine.
8.     In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v State of Punjab, 1980 (2) SCC 565, (Para 30), a
Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court held that the bail decision must enter the
cumulative effect of the variety of circumstances justifying the grant or refusal of bail.
In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, 2005 (2) SCC 42, (Para 18) a
three-member Bench of Supreme Court held that the persons accused of non-bailable
offences are entitled to bail if the Court concerned concludes that the prosecution has
failed to establish a prima facie case against him, or despite the existence of a prima
facie case, the Court records reasons for its satisfaction for the need to release such
person on bail, in the given fact situations. The rejection of bail does not preclude filing
a subsequent application. The courts can release on bail, provided the circumstances
then prevailing requires, and a change in the fact situation. In State of Rajasthan v
Balchand, AIR 1977 SC 2447, (Para 2 & 3), Supreme Court noticeably illustrated that the
basic rule might perhaps be tersely put as bail, not jail, except where there are
circumstances suggestive of fleeing from justice or thwarting the course of justice or
creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or intimidating witnesses and
the like by the petitioner who seeks enlargement on bail from the Court. It is true that
the gravity of the offence involved is likely to induce the petitioner to avoid the course
of justice and must weigh when considering the question of jail. So also, the
heinousness of the crime. In GudikantiNarasimhulu v Public Prosecutor, (1978) 1 SCC
240, (Para 16), Supreme Court held that the delicate light of the law favors release
unless countered by the negative criteria necessitating that course. In Prahlad Singh
Bhati v NCT, Delhi, (2001) 4 SCC 280, Supreme Court highlighted one of the factors for
bail to be the public or the State's immense interest and similar other considerations. In
Dataram Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh, (2018) 3 SCC 22, (Para 6), Supreme Court held
that the grant or refusal of bail is entirely within the discretion of the judge hearing the
matter and though that discretion is unfettered, it must be exercised judiciously,
compassionately, and in a humane manner. Also, conditions for the grant of bail ought
not to be so strict as to be incapable of compliance, thereby making the grant of bail
9.     The possibility of the accused henceforth not attending the trial, and the
likelihood of fleeing justice, can be taken care of by imposing elaborative and stringent
conditions. In Sushila Aggarwal, (2020) 5 SCC 1, Para 92, the Constitutional Bench held
that unusually, subject to the evidence produced, the Courts can impose restrictive
10.    Without commenting on the case's merits, and in the facts and circumstances
peculiar to this case, and also for the reasons mentioned above, the ends of justice
would meet with the following order.
11.    The petitioner shall surrender before the concerned court on or before July 30,
2022. On appearance, the concerned court shall release the petitioner on bail on the
same day, subject to furnishing bail bonds to its satisfaction and imposing additional
conditions, as it may deem appropriate in the background of the accused’s conduct.
12.    The petitioner to execute a bond for attendance in the concerned court.On the
reverse page of personal bonds, the petitioner shall mention the permanent address,
along with the phone number linked with the AADHAR card, the other phone numbers
(if any), and e-mail (if any). In case of any change in the above particulars, the
petitioner shall immediately and not later than 30 days from such modification,
intimate about the change to the concerned Police Station and the concerned Court.
13.    There shall be a stay of the petitioner's arrest in the case mentioned above until
July 30, 2022; however, if the petitioner fails to appear within the time stipulated
above, then stay on arrest shall stand vacated without any further reference to this
court. It is clarified that if the petitioner appears before the concerned court, then all
warrants issued by the concerned court against the petitioner, in the matter mentioned
above shall stand recalled and cancelled.
14.    On or before July 30, 2022, the petitioner shall procure a smartphone and inform
its IMEI number and other details to the SHO/I.O. of the Police station mentioned
before. The petitioner shall always keep the phone location/GPS on the “ON” mode.
Whenever the Investigating officer asks to share the location, the petitioner shall
immediately do so. The petitioner shall neither clear the location history, WhatsApp
chats, calls nor format the phone without permission of the concerned SHO/I.O. This
condition shall continue till the completion of the trial or closure of case, whatever is
15.   By July 30, 2022, the petitioner shall deposit a sum of rupees ten thousand in
‘High Court Lawyers Welfare Fund,’ Account number 65018692589, SB, IFCI code
SBIN0050306, Branch Code 50306, Brach Address State Bank of India, High Court
Branch, Sector 1, Chandigarh. After depositing, the petitioner shall file the proof of
deposit, before the concerned court and send its copy alongwith a copy of this order to
the Secretary, Punjab & Haryana High Court Bar Association, either in physical or
electronic mode.
16.   Any Advocate for the petitioner and the Officer in whose presence the petitioner
puts signatures on personal bonds shall explain all conditions of this bail order in any
language that the petitioner understands.
17.   Any observation made hereinabove is neither an expression of opinion on the
merits of the case nor shall the trial Court advert to these comments.
18.   There would be no need for a certified copy of this order, and any Advocate for the
Petitioner can download this order along with case status from the official web page of
this Court and attest it to be a true copy. In case the attesting officer wants to verify the
authenticity, such an officer can also verify its authenticity and may download and use
the downloaded copy for attesting bonds.
Petition partly allowed to the extent mentioned above. All pending applications, if
any, stand disposed.