The petitioner has come forward with this Writ petition seeking direction to the
respondent to release the Employees Provident Fund Pension to the petitioner as per the
nomination made by the deceased employee viz., petitioner's son under the Employees
Provident Fund Scheme from the date of death of the deceased employee on
21.02.2015, without insisting the particulars of the petitioner's husband.
2. The case of the petitioner is that the petitioner got married to one Sankaran in
the year 1988 and from out of their wedlock, three children were born to them and
thereafter the husband of the petitioner viz., Mr.Sankaran deserted the family in the year
2005. It is further stated that the first son of the petitioner viz., Karthikeyan joined for
work in M/s. CSS Corp Private Limited at Ambattur, Chennai and died in a road
accident on 21.02.2015. It is further stated that the petitioner being the mother of the
deceased approached the EPF authorities through the employer for disbursement of
pension, in view of her capacity as a nominee and, but the authorities have not released
the pension, as the details of the husband of the petitioner has not been furnished.
Therefore, the petitioner has come forward with this Writ Petition seeking for the
aforesaid relief.
3. Mr.Ramu, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent Department
submitted that in terms of 16 (5)(aa) of the Employees Pension Scheme 1995 , in case of
non nomination, the father of the deceased would be entitled to get full pension and in
the event of death of the father, mother would be entitled to pension till she survives
and whether other dependants are entitled to or not is not an issue in the present Writ
Petition. He further submitted that the writ petitioner should have filed FIR pertaining
to the complaint given by her on account of missing of her husband and if his
whereabouts are not found, she ought to have obtained certificate from the police,
thereafter produce the same in order to enable the EPF authorities to process the papers
and extend pensionery benefits to the petitioner. Since, the same has not been done,
EPF will not be in a position to release any amount against the provisions of pension
scheme 1995.
4. In reply, Mr.Balamuralikrishnan learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
submitted that the husband of the petitioner deserted the family before 15 years and the
police may not entertain the complaint at this distance of time. Hence, this Court may
direct the respondent to release the EPF Pension to the writ petitioner.
5. Heard both sides. Perused the records. The only issue whether the mother of
the deceased would be entitled to pension in terms of the Employees Pension scheme.
6. For the sake of convenience, clause No.16(5)(aa) of the Employees Pension
“16(5)(aa) If a member dies leaving behind no spouse and/an
eligible child falling within the definition of family and no nomination by
such deceased member exists, the widow pension shall be paid under sub-
clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub-paragraph 2 either to dependent
father or dependant mother as the case may be. On grant of pension to
such dependant father and in the event of death of the father pensioner, the
admissible pension shall be extended to the surviving mother lifelong.”
7. It is no doubt true that the husband of the petitioner deserted the house of the
petitioner and his whereabouts are not known. The first son of the petitioner viz.,
Karthikeyan who was employed in M/s.CSS Corp Private Limited died in an accident
and the petitioner being the mother is entitled to PF benefits.
8. A reading of the provisions referred to supra would make it clear that the father
of the deceased is entitled to pension and in the event of demise of the father, mother
wife is entitled to pension till she is alive. Since, the deceased is a Bachelor, the writ
petitioner ought to have given the complaint on missing of her husband and ought to
have obtained a certificate from the police, in order to get pensionery benefits, but the
same has not been done. Hence, in order to give quietus to the matter, the Writ
petitioner may be permitted to give complaint to the concerned police with regard to the
missing of her husband, within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a copy
of this order and the concerned Police officials is expected to accept the complaint and
furnish CSR to the petitioner. Further, the police authorities may verify and issue
certificate as to whether the person is alive or not traceable, so that the monetary
benefits may be extended to the petitioner by the Employees Provident Fund
Organisation. On a production of said certificate, writ petitioner who is the mother of
the deceased shall be extended with the pensionery benefits, as the narrow interpretation
of Section 16 (5)(aa) cannot be given, more so, in the peculiar circumstances of the
case.
9. In such view of the matter, this Court directs the respondent to pay 50% of the
pension amount to the writ petitioner, the mother of the deceased till she obtains
certificate from the police and on such production of certificate and by furnishing
indemnity bond, remaining 50% may be released to the Writ Petitioner.
10. This Writ Petition is ordered accordingly. No costs.