Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 20144 of 2007
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Others
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate,Sushil Kumar Pandey
1. List revised. Heard Sri Onkar Singh, learned counsel
for the applicant and learned AGA for the State. None
appears on behalf of the complainant though Sri Sushil
Kumar Pandey, Advocate, has filed his appearance on his
behalf and also filed counter affidavit.
2. Present application has been filed to quash the
summoning order dated 27.06.2007 as well as the
Complaint Case No. 60/9 of 2007 (Naseen Vs. Gyani &
Ors.), under Section 500 IPC, pending in the court of Civil
3. Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is two
fold. First, it has been submitted, the statements that
forms subject matter of allegation of defamation, was
recorded in the course of a criminal investigation in Case
Crime No. 558 of 2006. In that case, the applicant is listed
as a prosecution witness against the complainant
Naseem. The said case was pending on the date of
institution of the present complaint. Therefore, allegation
of defamation may not arise at such preliminary stage. By
way of second limb of that submission, it has been
submitted that in any case, the statement made by the
witness in the course of investigation made never
constitute the offence of defamation. Then, it has been
submitted that the affidavits that allegedly form the subject
matter of the complaint have not been brought on record.
Though the applicant had clearly stated in the affidavit
filed in support of the present application that those
affidavits were not available to him yet, the opposite party
no.2/complainant has not brought the same on record
alongwith his counter affidavit.
4. Referring to the statement of the applicant recorded in
Case Crime No. 558 of 2006 (Annexure No.5 to the
affidavit filed in support of the present application), it is
submitted that the applicant had only stated that the said
Naseem had close relationship with Sanyogita wife of
Sompal. He nowhere stated that Naseem had formed
illicit relationship with Sanyogita.
5. On the other hand, learned AGA would submit, all pleas
would be available to the applicant at the trial and no
interference is warranted at this stage.
6. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and
having perused the record, in the first place, it is
undisputed that the statement made by the applicant was
in the course of an inquiry by the police in Case Crime
No. 558 of 2006 wherein the complainant - Naseem is an
accused person. That case was pending on the date of
complaint being lodged. For that reason, the application
appears to be pre-mature in the peculiar facts of the
present case.
7. Even otherwise, without expressing any definite opinion
if the statement on oath alleged to have been made by
the      applicant   would   constitute the  ingredients   of
defamation as such statement was made during a lawful
proceeding, the copy of the statement recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. does appear to suggest that the
applicant had only stated that the complainant Naseem
had a close relationship with Sanyogita. In itself that may
never be enough to constitute the offence of defamation.
8. That statement may be factually wrong but it can never
be read as an imputation with intent to harm the
reputation of Naseem. The fact that Sanyogita and
Naseem belong to opposite gender, would not be relevant
for the purpose of completion of the ingredients of the
offence alleged. Being close to someone in a natural or
normal human relationship and to form               an illicit
relationship are two completely different things.
9. Whether the applicant had made further or other
imputation in the affidavit relied upon in the complaint is
not clear inasmuch as though the applicant had stated he
did not have available copies of such affidavits, the
complainant has not helped the matter by not bringing the
same on record though he has filed the counter affidavit.
10. In the above circumstance, it appears, no useful
purpose would be served in allowing such a vague
prosecution to continue, any further.
11. In the entirety of facts and circumstance, present
application is allowed. The summoning order dated
27.06.2007 as well as the Complaint Case No. 60/9 of
2007 (Naseen Vs. Gyani & Ors.), under Section 500 IPC,
pending     in   the    court of Civil Judge    (Jr.  Div.)-I,
Muzaffarnagar are quashed.