The Madras High Court recently directed the Thoothukudi District Collector and police authorities to strictly implement a Circular Memorandum regarding procedure to be followed while granting permission to conduct cultural events, sports events, procession/meeting etc. The authorities were thus to ensure that no obscene or vulgar dance performance or other procession takes place during the...
The Madras High Court recently directed the Thoothukudi District Collector and police authorities to strictly implement a Circular Memorandum regarding procedure to be followed while granting permission to conduct cultural events, sports events, procession/meeting etc. The authorities were thus to ensure that no obscene or vulgar dance performance or other procession takes place during the Dasara festival in the Arultharum Mutharamman temple.
 We direct that the obscene and vulgar dance performance should be specifically prohibited by the Police authorities in the forthcoming festival and if any one violates the same, appropriate action shall be taken against them in line with the above said Circular Memorandum. 
 The bench of Justice R Mahadevan and Justice Sathya Narayana Prasad were hearing a petition filed by one Ramkumar Adityan to direct the police authorities to obtain a declaration from the organisers of all Dasara Groups and Sound Hire Service Providers not to sing and play any non Devotional Songs and Kuthu Pattu during Dasara festival in connection to the festival of Arultharum Mutharamman Thirukovil, Kulasekarapattinam, Thoothukudi District. By doing so, the petitioner sought to stop vulgar and obscene dance performances in the name of Dasara Groups and to protect the Traditional Culture, Traditional Viradham System and Religious sentiments of lakhs of Devotees. 
 The petitioner submitted that though initially the Dasara Festival was associated with processions and folk music and dance, now these Dasara groups started hiring cine/television actors who without observing any virudham would perform obscene and vulgar dance performances. 
 The court perused through the photographs produced by the petitioner and was convinced that the same made a mockery of the traditional culture. 
 While photographs from page Nos.22 to 27 relating to Dasara celebration in other places in India show traditional culture and customs, photographs from pages 28 to 37 relating to devotees who are observing viradham and watching dances at Kulasekaranpatinam Dasara celebration, conspicuously show that such dances are performed by paid dancers exhibiting obscene and vulgar postures making mockery of the traditional culture and customs to be followed in Dasara festival and denigrating the Hindu religious sentiments.
 The Additional Public Prosecutor submitted that pursuant to the orders of the court, the Director General of Police had issued a circular memorandum in 2018 to all Commissioners of Police in Cities and all the Superintendent of Police in Districts, instructing them to ensure compliance with the orders of the court.
 The Inspectors were further directed to obtain an undertaking from the organisers that there will not be any obscenity or vulgarity in the cultural programs or any disturbance to the public peace and tranquility. In case any violation was noticed, the authorities were directed to take stringent/criminal action against those concerned.
 Later, in 2019 another circular was issued with consolidated instructions with regard to the procedures to be followed while granting permission to conduct cultural events,sports events, procession/meeting etc. The AAG assured the court that these circulars will be followed in letter and spirit during the current Dasara festival also. 
 In view of such submission by the AAG, the court disposed of the petition directing the authorities to strictly follow the memorandum and the directives of the court. 
 Case Title: B Ramkumar Adityan v District Collector, Thoothukudi
 Case No: W.P(MD) No.21756 of 2022
 Counsel for the Petitioner: Mr.S.Sankar
 Counsel for the Respondents: Mr.P.Thilakkumar, Government Pleader (R1), Mr.T.Senthil Kumar Additional Public Prosecutor (R2-R4), Mr.M.Muthugeethayan (R5)

