Ashok Bhushan,J.(for himself and S. Abdul Nazeer,
J.),   L.Nageswara  Rao,J.   Hemant   Gupta,J.   and  S.
Ravindra Bhat have also concurred on Question Nos.
1, 2 and 3.
This Constitution Bench has been constituted to
consider questions of seminal importance relating to
contours and extent of special provisions for the
advancement of socially and educationally backward
class    (SEBC)  of    citizens   as   contemplated     under
Article 15(4) and contours and extent of provisions
of   reservation    in   favour  of   the  backward     class
citizens under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of
India.      The    challenge/interpretation         of    the
Constitution (102nd Amendment) Act, 2018 is also up
for consideration.
2.    All   the   above     appeals    have     been    filed
challenging the common judgment of the High Court
dated 27.06.2019 by which judgment several batches
of   writ  petitions    have  been   decided   by   the  High
Court. Different writ petitions were filed before
the High Court between the years 2014 to 2019, apart
from     other   challenges      following     were     under
The   Ordinance    No.   XIII   of     2014   dated
09.07.2014 providing 16% reservation to Maratha.
The Ordinance No.XIV of 2014 dated 09.07.2014
providing   for    5%  reservation    to    52   Muslim
(of    seats    for     appointment     in   educational
institutions in the State and for appointment or
posts for public services under the State) for
educationally      and   socially    backward    category
(ESBC) Act, 2014 and Maharashtra State Socially
and     Educationally       Backward      Class    (SEBC)
(Admission in Educational Institutions in the
State and for posts for appointments in public
service     and    posts)     Reservation     Act,   2018
(hereinafter referred to as the “Act, 2018”).
3.   The High Court by the impugned judgment upheld
Act,   2018,   except     to   the   extent   of  quantum   of
reservation provided under Section 4(1)(a), 4(1)(b)
over    and   above     12%    and    13%   respectively    as
recommended     by   Maharashtra      State   Backward   Class
Commission.     The    writ    petitions    challenging    the
Ordinance XIII and XIV of 2014 as well as Act, 2014
were   dismissed    as   having    become   infructuous.   Few
writ petitions were also allowed and few detagged
and other writ petitions have been disposed of.
4.   Writ    petition    under    Article   32   of    the
Constitution of India, namely, Writ Petition(C) No.
938 of 2020 (Shiv Sangram & Anr. vs. Union of India
& Anr.) has been filed questioning the Constitution
5.   While  issuing   notice   on  12.07.2019,  a   three-
Judge Bench of this Court directed that the action
taken pursuant to the impugned judgment of the High
Court shall be subject to the result of the SLP. It
was made clear that the judgment of the High Court
and the reservation in question shall not have any
retrospective    effect.  The   three-Judge  Bench   after
hearing the parties, on 09.09.2020, while granting
“17. In view of the foregoing, we pass the
provisions inserted by the Constitution
substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the Constitution of
India, these Appeals are referred to a
larger Bench. These matters shall be
placed before Hon’ble The Chief Justice of
India for suitable orders.
(B) Admissions to educational institutions
for the academic year 2020-21 shall be
made without reference to the reservations
provided in the Act. We make it clear that
the   Admissions   made    to    Post-Graduate
Medical Courses shall not be altered.
(C) Appointments to public services and
posts under the Government shall be made
without implementing the reservation as
provided in the Act.
Liberty to mention for early hearing. “
6.   A  Three-Judge   Bench  referring     the  matter   to
Constitution Bench has referred all the appeals and
the   order  contemplated   that   the   matter  shall   be
placed before the Chief Justice for the suitable
orders. Referring order although mention that the
interpretation    of  Constitution     (One   Hundred   and
Second Amendment) Act, 2018 is substantial question
of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution
but  the   reference  was  not   confined   to  the   above
question. The learned counsel for the parties have
made elaborate submissions in all the appeals as
well as the writ petitions filed under Article 32.
Elaborate submissions were addressed on the impugned
judgment of the High Court. We thus have proceeded
to hear the parties and decide all the appeals and
writ petitions finally.
7.    After appeals being referred to a larger Bench
by order dated 09.09.2020, Hon’ble the Chief Justice
of   India  has  constituted  this   Constitution    Bench
before whom these appeals and writ petitions are
listed.    This   Constitution   Bench    after    hearing
learned counsel for the parties passed an order on
08.03.2021 issuing notice to all the States. The
Bench by order further directed the States to file
brief notes of their submissions.
8.    The   hearing   commenced   on    15.03.2021     and
concluded    on  26.03.2021.  At  this    stage,   we  may
indicate the headings in which we have divided to
comprehensively understand the issues, submissions,
our consideration, our conclusion and operative part
of   the  judgment.  The  following   are  the   heads  of
subjects   under   which we  have   treated   the   entire
(3) Points   for  consideration   before   the  High
(4) Submissions of the parties.
(5) The 10 grounds urged for referring         Indra
Sawhney judgment to a larger Bench.
(6) The status of Reservation      at  the  time  of
Enactment of Act, 2018.
(7) Consideration    of   10  grounds    urged   for
revisiting and referring the judgment of
Indra Sawhney to a larger Bench.
(8) Principle of Stare Decisis.
(9) Whether Gaikwad Commission Report has made
out a case of extra-ordinary situation for
grant of separate reservation to Maratha
(10) Whether the Act, 2018 as amended in 2019
granting separate reservation for Maratha
community by exceeding the ceiling limit of
50% makes out exceptional circumstances as
(11) Gaikwad Commission Report – a scrutiny.
(12) Whether the data of Marathas in public
employment as found out by Gaikwad Commission
makes out cases for grant of reservation
under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of
(13) Social   and   Educational   Backwardness    of
9.   On   08.03.2021     the   six  questions    which  were
proposed to be considered were enumerated in the
“1. Whether judgment in case of Indra Sawhney
v. Union of India [1992 Suppl. (3) SCC 217]
needs to be referred to larger bench or
require re-look by the larger bench in the
light of subsequent Constitutional Amendments,
judgments and changed social dynamics of the
seats      for      admission      in     educational
institutions in the State and for appointments
in the public services and posts under the
State) for Socially and Educationally Backward
Classes (SEBC) Act, 2018 as amended in 2019
granting 12% and 13% reservation for Maratha
community      in     addition    to     50%   social
reservation       is    covered     by    exceptional
circumstances as contemplated by Constitution
3. Whether the State Government on the
strength     of     Maharashtra     State    Backward
Commission Report chaired by M.C. Gaikwad has
extraordinary        situation    and     exceptional
circumstances in the State to fall within the
exception carved out in the judgment of Indra
4. Whether the Constitution One Hundred and
Second    Amendment      deprives      the    State
legislation   determining     the   socially    and
economically backward classes and conferring
the benefits on the said community under its
5. Whether, States power to legislate in
relation   to   “any    backward    class”    under
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is anyway abridged by
Article 342(A) read with Article 366(26c) of
6. Whether, Article 342A of the Constitution
abrogates   States    power    to   legislate    or
classify in respect of “any backward class of
citizens” and thereby affects the federal
policy / structure of the Constitution of
10. We need to first notice certain background facts
relevant for the present case and details of various
writ   petitions   filed   in   the    High   Court.   The
“Maratha” is a Hindu community which mainly resides
in the State of Maharashtra. After the enforcement
of the Constitution of India, the President of India
in exercise of power under Article 240 appointed a
Commission to investigate the conditions of all such
socially and educationally backward classes, known
as   Kaka  Kalelkar   Commission,    the  first   National
Commission for backward classes. The Kaka Kalelkar
Commission submitted its report on 30.03.1955 where
it observed - Vol.I “In Maharashtra, besides the
Brahman it is the Maratha who claimed to be the
ruling community in the villages, and the Prabhu,
that   dominated  all   other   communities”.   Thus,  the
first   Backward   Classes    Commission   did   not  find
Maratha as other backward class community in the
State of Bombay.
11. On 01.11.1956, a bilingual State of Bombay under
the State Re-organisation Act was formed with the
addition of 8 districts of Vidharbha (Madhya Bharat)
and 5 districts of Marathwada (Hyderabad State). On
14.08.1961 through Ministry of Home Affairs while
declining to act on the Kaka Kalelkar Commission
Report informed all the State Governments that they
had   discretion  to   choose    their  own  criteria   in
defining backward classes and it would be open for
State   Governments    to   draw   its   own   list  of   other
backward    classes.     On    14.11.1961    acting    on   the
directives     of    the     Government     of    India,    the
Government    of   Maharashtra      appointed     B.D.Deshmukh
Committee for defining OBC and to take steps for
their   developments.      The    B.D.   Deshmukh    Committee
submitted its report on OBC to the Government of
Maharashtra on 11.01.1964. It did not find Maratha
as   backward   class.    On    13.08.1967,     the  State   of
Maharashtra issued unified list of OBC consisting of
180   castes   for   the    entire    State   which   did   not
include Maratha. At serial No.87, Kunbi was shown.
The President of India on 31.12.1979 appointed the
second National Backward Classes Commission within
the   meaning   of   Article     340   of  the    Constitution
popularly known as Mandal Commission. In the report
of second National Backward Classes Commission with
regard    to     the    State      of    Maharashtra      while
distributing    percentage      of   Indian    population    by
castes    and    religious      groups,     estimated     other
backward classes as 43.70 per cent, whereas in the
category of forward Hindu castes and communities the
Marathas   were  included    with   2.2   per   cent.  The
population of other backward classes of remaining
Hindu  Castes   groups  was    estimated    as  43.7%  and
backward   non-Hindu  classes    as  8.40   per  cent  and
total approximate backward class of Hindu including
non-Hindu castes was estimated as 52%. At page 56 of
volume of report under heading percentage of the
castes   and   religious    groups    under    sub-heading
forward Hindu castes and communities following table
12. The Maratha, thus, was included in forward Hindu
caste,   by  the  second    National    Backward   Classes
13. A    request   was   received     by    the   National
Commission   for  Backward   Classes   for   inclusion  of
“Maratha” in the Central List of Backward Classes
for Maharashtra along with Kunbi as backward class
of Maharashtra. The National Commission for Backward
Classes conducted public hearing at Mumbai and after
hearing    Government   officials,    Chairman     of  the
submitted a detailed report dated 25.02.1980 holding
that Maratha is not a socially and educationally
backward class community but a socially advanced and
prestigious   community.   It  is   useful   to  refer  to
paragraph 22 of the report (last paragraph) which is
position, the Bench finds that Maratha is
not a socially backward community but is a
socially     advanced      and      prestigious
community and therefore the Request for
Inclusion of “Maratha” in the Central List
of Backward Classes for Maharashtra along
with Kunbi should be rejected. In fact,
“Maratha” does not merit inclusion in the
Central List of Backward Classes for
Maharashtra either jointly with “Kunbi” or
under a separate entry of its own.”
14. On 16.11.1992 a nine-Judge Constitution Bench of
this Court delivered a judgment in Indra Sawhney v.
Union   of   India    [1992    Suppl.   (3)    SCC    217]
(hereinafter referred to as “Indra Sawhney’s case”),
apart from laying down law pertaining to principle
of reservation under Constitution this Court also
issued directions to the Government of India, each
of the State Governments to constitute a permanent
body  for  entertaining,    examining  and  recommending
upon on requests for inclusion and complaints of
over   inclusion   of    other   backward    classes    of
citizens.
15. The Maharashtra State OBC Commission headed by
Justice R.M. Bapat submitted a report on 25.07.2008
conclusively  recording    that  Maratha   could   not  be
included in the OBC list because it is a forward
caste. The report in the end concluded:
“It was agreed with majority that the
resolution, stating that it would not be
perspective to include Maratha community
in the 'Other Backward Class' category,
has been passed with majority in the
commission's meeting convened in Pune on
majority that such a recommendation should
be sent to the government. The opposite
opinion in relation to this has been
separately     recorded    and   it    has    been
attached herewith.”
Commission on 03.06.2013 rejected the request of the
State Government to review the findings recorded by
the   State    OBC   Commission    in  its    report    dated
25.07.2008    holding   the   Maratha   caste    as  forward
community. Despite the existence of statutory State
OBC    Commission,    the    Government    of   Maharashtra
appointed a special Committee headed by a sitting
Minister, Shri Narayan Rane to submit a report on
the   Maratha   Caste.   On   26.02.2014    Rane   Committee
submitted its report to the State and recommended
that    for  the   Maratha    special   reservation     under
Article 15(4) and 16(4) of the Constitution of India
be   provided.   On   09.07.2014    Maharashtra    Ordinance
No.XIII of 2014 was promulgated providing for 16%
reservation in favour of the Maratha caste. Writ
Petition No.2053 of 2014 (Shri Sanjeet Shukla vs.
State   of    Maharashtra)    along     with    other   writ
petitions were filed where two separate Ordinances
promulgated on 09.07.2014 providing for reservation
for  seats   for  admissions    in   aided   and   non-aided
institutions of the State and appointment to the
post to public service under the State a separate
16% reservation in which Maratha was included, was
challenged.     The    Government       resolution     dated
15.07.2014 specifying the Maratha community as the
community     socially    and     economically      backward
entitled for 16% reservation was challenged.
17. The   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court  by  an
elaborate order considering the relevant materials
including the reports of National Backward Classes
Commission and State Backward Classes Commission and
other materials on record stayed the operation of
Maharashtra Ordinance No.XIII of 2014 and Resolution
dated 15.07.2014. However, it was directed that in
case  any   admission    has  already     been   granted  in
educational    institution   till    that   date   based  on
Ordinance   No.XIII   of  2014   the   same  shall   not  be
disturbed and the Students shall allow to complete
their respective courses.
18. The SLP(C)Nos.34335 and 34336 were filed in this
Court   challenging   interim   order  dated   14.11.2014
which SLPs were not entertained by this Court with
request to decide the writ petitions at an early
date.
19. The Maharashtra Legislature passed the Act, 2014
on   23.12.2014  which    received  the   assent  of  the
Governor on 09.01.2015,     and was deemed to have come
into   force  with  effect   from  09.07.2014.   In  Writ
Petition (C)No. 3151 of 2014 and other connected
matters the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court
passed    an   order    on    07.04.2015    staying   the
implementation of the provisions of the Act 1 of
2015   providing   16%   reservation   to   Maratha.  The
interim order, however, directed that appointment to
16% reservation for Maratha under Act 1 of 2015 in
the advertisements already issued shall be made from
open merit candidates till final disposal of the
writ petition and appointment shall be made subject
to the outcome of the writ petition.
20. On   30.06.2017   the    State   Government    made    a
reference to State Backward Classes Commission to
submit a report on the facts and the observation
made in the reference to the Government regarding
Maratha. On 02.11.2017 Justice M.G. Gaikwad came to
be appointed as Chairman of State Backward Classes
Commission.   On  14.08.2018   the  National    Commission
for   Backward   Classes    (Repeal)    Act   was   passed
repealing   the   National    Commission    for   Backward
Classes Act, 1993. On 15.08.2018 the Constitution
(102nd Amendment) Act, 2018 was brought into force
adding Article 338B, 342A and 366(26C). Article 338,
sub-clause (10) was also amended. On 15.11.2018, the
State   Backward   Classes   Commission    submitted    its
report on social and educational and economic status
of Maratha. The Commission recommended for declaring
Maratha caste of citizens as social and economic
backward    class    of    citizens    with     inadequate
representation    in  services.    The   Commission   also
opined that looking to the exceptional circumstances
and  extraordinary  situations  on  declaring Maratha
class as SEBC and their consequential entitlement to
the reservation benefits, the Government may take
decision within the constitutional provisions. The
Government after receipt of the above report enacted
Act, 2018 which was published on 30.11.2018 and came
into force from that day. PIL No.175 of 2018 (Dr.
Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil Vs. The Chief Minister and
Ors.) and other writ petitions and PILs were filed
challenging the Act, 2018. The High Court in the
impugned judgment has noticed the pleadings in three
writ petitions being PIL No.175 of 2018 giving rise
to C.A.No.3123 of 2020, W.P.(LD.) No.4100 of 2018
(Sanjeet Shukla vs. The State of Maharashtra) giving
rise to C.A.No.3124 of 2020 and PIL No.4128 of 2018
(Dr. Uday Govindraj Dhople & Anr. vs. The State of
Maharashtra & Anr.) giving rise to C.A.No.3125 of
2020.   Before  us   in   C.A.No.3123   of  2020  and
C.A.No.3124 of 2020 most of the volumes and written
submissions have been filed. It shall be sufficient
to notice these three Civil Appeals, apart from the
details  of  few  other  cases  which shall  be noted
hereinafter.
C.A.No.3123 of 2020 (Dr. Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil Vs.
21. This appeal has been filed against the judgment
of the High Court in PIL NO.175 of 2018 filed by Dr.
Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil questioning the 16% separate
reservation   given   to   Maratha  under  Act,  2018
published on 30.11.2018. The writ petitioner pleaded
that providing reservation to Maratha community to
the extent of 16% amounts to breach of Article 14,
16 and 21 of the Constitution of India and also
bypassing ceiling of reservation of 50%. Referring
to judgment of this Court in Indra Sawhney’s case
and law laid down in Mr. Nagraj and others vs. Union
of India & Ors. (2006) 8 SCC 212, it was pleaded
that the reservation is not permissible beyond 50%.
Various grounds had been taken in the writ petition
questioning the 16% reservation for Maratha. During
the pendency of the writ petition subsequent events
occurred resulting into enlarging the scope of the
petition, in the writ petition several applications
for   intervention   and  impleadment    have  been  filed
seeking to justify the Act, 2018. The High Court
allowed the applications for intervention and they
were directed to be added as party respondents.
C.A.No.3124 of 2020 (Sanjeet Shukla vs. The State of
22. This appeal arises out of the judgment in Writ
Petition (C) No.4100 of 2018. In the writ petition
an   extensive   challenge   was  made   to  the  Backward
Classes Commission report which was basis for Act,
2018. The same writ petitioner i.e. Sanjeet Shukla
has earlier filed Writ Petition (C) No.3151 of 2014
challenging     the   Ordinance     promulgated   by   the
Government   of   Maharashtra   in   the  year  2014.  The
interim order dated 14.11.2014 was passed in the
Writ Petition No.3151 of 2014. The petitioner has
also pleaded that the Act, 2014 was also stayed by
the High court on 07.04.2015. It was pleaded that
Maratha community is a powerful community in the
State    of  Maharashtra    with   proved   dominance   in
operatives    etc.    reference    of   earlier   National
Backward Class Commission and State Backward Class
Commission was made wherein the claim of Maratha to
be included in OBC was rejected. The comments have
also been made on the aggressive tactics adopted by
the Maratha community by agitation, dharna for the
grant of reservation to them. It was also pleaded
that Act, 2018 is passed without complying with the
requirement of Constitution (102nd     Amendment) Act,
2018. In the writ petition following prayers have
“(a) Issue a writ, order or direction in
the nature of certiorari or any other
appropriate writ, order or direction of
that nature thereby quashing and striking
down    Maharashtra    State  Socially   and
(Admission in Educational Institutions in
the State and for posts for appointments
in public service and posts) Reservation
Act, 2018, as being invalid and violative
of the provisions of the Constitution of
(b) During pendency of the petition, this
Hon'ble Court be pleased to say to the
operation, implementation and effect of
the    Maharashtra    State  Socially    and
(Admission in Educational Institutions in
the State and for posts for appointments
in public service and posts) Reservation
petition, this Hon'ble      Court be pleased
to issue an appropriate writ, order or
direction that no appointments should be
made under Maharashtra State Socially and
(Admission in Educational Institutions in
the State and for posts for appointments
in public service and posts) Reservation
petition, this Hon'ble      Court be pleased
to issue an appropriate writ, order or
direction of that nature that no posts
should be kept vacant by reference to the
(Admission in Educational Institutions in
the State and for posts for appointments
in public service and posts) Reservation
petition, this Hon'ble Court be pleased to
issue   an   appropriate    writ,    order   or
advertisements for vacancies should be
(Admission in Educational Institutions in
the State and for posts for appointments
in public service and posts) Reservation
petition, this Hon'ble Court be pleased to
issue   an   appropriate    writ,    order   or
direction of that nature that no admission
in educational institutions should be made
(Admission in Educational Institutions in
the State and for posts for appointments
in public service and posts) Reservation
b5. during pendency Court be pleased to
issue   an   appropriate    writ,    order   or
direction of that nature that no Caste
Certificates    should    be    issued    under
(Admission in Educational Institutions in
the State and for posts for appointments
in public service and posts) Reservation
C.A.No.3125 of 2020 (Dr. Uday Govindraj Dhople &
Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr.)
23. This   appeal    arises   out    of   Writ   Petition
(LD.)No.4128 of 2018 filed by Dr. Udai Govindraj
Dhople.    The    writ    petition      was    filed   in
representative capacity on behalf of the similarly
situated medical students/medical aspirants who are
adversely affected by the Act, 2018.
24. The writ petitioners seek quashing of Act, 2018
and in the alternative quashing and setting aside
Sections 2(j), 3(2), 3(4), 4,5,9(2),10 and 12 of the
Act, 2018. The petitioner pleads that reservation
system  has   become   a  tool   of  convenience    for  the
Government and politicians in power for their vote
bank. It is further pleaded that Maratha was never
treated   as   backward   class   community   and    earlier
their claim was rejected. It was further pleaded
that the impugned enactment seriously prejudices the
chances   of    open   candidates    in   all   fields    of
education   as   well  as  in   service.  It  was    further
pleaded   that   Gaikwad   Commission's    report    is  not
based on fiscal data. There was inadequacy of data
base. A community which was found not to be backward
for last 50 years is now declared as backward class
without   any    change   of   circumstances.     The   writ
petitioner,    pleads   that   enactment   shall   have   an
adverse effect which shall divide the society by
caste basis on communal line. The impugned enactment
is claimed to be violative of the basic structure
and    fundamental      value    of    the    Constitution
capitulated    in   Article   14,   16   and   19   of   the
C.A.Nos.3133, 3134 and 3131 of 2020
25. These appeals have been filed by the appellants
who were not parties in the PIL No.175 of 2018,
against     the   High    Court    judgment   praying   for
permission    to   file    SLP   which  has  already   been
granted.
26. C.A.No.3129     arising    out   of PIL(ST)No.1949   of
2019 whereby 16% reservation to Maratha under Act,
2018 has been challenged.
27. Writ Petition (C)No.915 of 2020 has been filed
under    Article   32   of   the   Constitution   of  India
praying for directing the respondents that all the
admission to Post Graduate Medical & Dental Courses
in the State of Maharashtra for the academic year
2020-21 shall be made subject to the outcome of the
SLP(C)No.15735 of 2019 and connected petitions.
28. Writ Petition (C) No.504 of 2020 filed under
Article 32 has been filed seeking mandamus direction
to   the   respondents   that   provisions   of  Act,  2018
should not be made applicable to the admission to
Post Graduate Medical & Dental Courses in the State
of Maharashtra for the academic year 2020-21.
29. Writ Petition (C) No.914 of 2020 filed under
Article   32   prays   for   writ   in   the   nature   of
certiorari or any other writ or order or direction
to   hold  the  impugned   Socially    and  Educationally
Backward     Classes      (SEBC)     Act,      2018     as
unconstitutional and violative of Article 14, 16 &
19 of the Constitution of India and further Act,
2018 should not be made available to the medical
admission process for Post-graduate students for the
academic year 2020-21 in the State of Maharashtra.
30. C.A.No.3127 of 2020 arises out of Writ Petition
(C)No.4128   of   2018.   The   prayer   of   which   writ
petition has already been noticed by C.A.No.3125 of
31. C.A.No. 3126 of 2020 has been filed against the
impugned judgment of the High Court in Writ Petition
(C)No.3846   of  2019   (Mohammad   Sayeed   Noori  Shafi
Ahmed & Ors. vs. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.).
Writ Petitioners were challenging the Act, 2018 as
well    as   the    Maharashtra      State    Backward     Class
Commission     Report     on    the    Social,     Educational,
Economic Status of the Marathas and Allied Aspects,
2018. The question was also raised about inaction on
the part of the State of Maharashtra in not acting
upon    the   report    of    Maharashtra      State    Minority
Commission (2011) recommending            special reservation
to    certain    Muslim     communities      and    failure    to
introduce    a    Bill    on   the     floor    of   the   State
Legislature     providing     for   5%    reservation     to   52
Muslim communities in Maharashtra.
32. C.A.No.3128 of 2020 arising out of Writ Petition
(C) No.4269 of 2018(Vishnuji P. Mishra vs. The State
of   Maharashtra)wherein       similar     reliefs    have   been
claimed as in PIL No.175 of 2018.
33. Writ Petition (C) No.938 of 2018 has been filed
under    Article    32   of   the    Constitution      of  India
challenging     the    validity     of    Constitution     (102nd
Amendment)    Act,   2018.    Writ    Petition    notices    that
issue regarding Constitution (102nd Amendment) Act,
2018      is      pending     in      SLP(C)No.15737        of
2019(C.A.No.3123 of 2020). The writ petitioner also
claimed to have filed an I.A.No.66438 of 2020 for
impleadment     in   SLP(C)  No.    15737    of    2019.   The
petitioner's submission is that if the effect of
Constitution (102nd Amendment) Act, 2019 is to take
away   power   of   State  Legislature     with   respect   to
identification     of   OBC/SEBC,   it    is   obvious    that
Constitution (102nd Amendment) Act, 2018 has taken
away   the   legislative   powers   of   State    Legislature
with respect to some areas of law making power.            The
petitioner,     further,   submits    that    the   procedure
prescribed by the proviso to clause (2) of Article
368   of   the   Constitution   of   India    has   not   been
followed since no ratification by the legislatures
of   not    less   than   one-half    of    the    States   by
Resolution     was   obtained.   In    the   writ    petition
“a) This Hon'ble Court be pleased to hold
and declare that the 102nd Amendment of the
Constitution of India published in the
Gazette of India dated 11.08.2018 is
unconstitutional being in violation of
proviso to clause (2) of Article 368 and
guaranteed under Article 14 and 21 of the
Constitution of India.
b) This Hon'ble Court please to issue a
writ of mandamus or a writ in the nature
of mandamus or any other writ, order or
direction    directing    that     the    102nd
Amendment of the Constitution of India
shall not be enforced hereafter as a
result of its being violative of Article
368 as also the basic structure of the
Constitution of India and also being
violative of Article 14 and 21 of the
Constitution of India.”
34. In the writ petitions before the High Court, the
State of Maharashtra has filed affidavit in reply
dated 16.01.2018 in Writ Petition No.4100 of 2018
supporting the Act, 2018, which has been extensively
relied by the High Court in the impugned judgment.
The affidavits were also filed by the intervenors
and  affidavits   were  filed  in   support  of   Chamber
Summons.  The   High  Court  after   perusing   the   writ
petitions,   affidavits,   applications   filed   by   the
interveners,   Chamber  Summons  and   supporting    other
materials and after hearing counsel appearing for
the   respective   parties   has   broadly   capitulated
following points for consideration:
(3) Points for consideration before the High Court.
35. “(III) Whether the impugned Act of 2018 is
constitutionally invalid on account of lack
of legislative competence on the following
Maharashtra    (WP    3151/2014)    thereby
granting stay to a similar enactment
and ordinance of the State, which is
pending for adjudication before this
Amendment, 2018 deprives the State
legislation determining the Socially
and Educationally Backward Class and
conferring the benefits on the said
power under Article 15(4) and 16(4) of
the Constitution.
principle do not permit reservation in
excess of 50%.
(IV) Whether the State has been able to
establish   the    social     and   educational
representation of the Maratha community in
public employment on the basis of the
report of MSBCC under the Chairmanship of
quantifiable and contemporaneous data ?
interference in the findings, conclusions
and recommendation of the MSBCC.
(VI) Whether the reservation        carved out
Government in form of impugned     legislation
satisfies the parameters of          reasonable
classification under Article        14 of the
(VII) Whether the ceiling of 50% laid down
by the Hon'ble Apex Court in case of Indra
Sawhney vs. Union of India, is to be taken
deviation thereof violates the basic tenet
of equality enshrined in the Constitution?
circumstances or extra-ordinary situation
to exceed the permissible limit of 50%
within the scope of guiding principles
findings, conclusions and recommendations
of the MSBCC report, whether the State
Government has justified exercise of its
enabling power under Article 15(4) and
16(4) of the Constitution ?”
36. The High Court in paragraph 177 of the judgment
has   summarised    its  conclusion    to   the  following
“177. In the light of the discussion
above, we summarize our conclusions to the
points which we have formulated in the
proemial of the judgment and deliberated
[1] We hold and declare that the State
possess the legislative competence to
enact the Maharashtra State Reservation
for Seats for Admission in Educational
appointments in the public services and
posts under the State (for Socially and
2018 and State’s legislative competence is
and the interim order passed by this Court
in Writ Petition No. 3151 of 2014. We
resultantly uphold the impugned enactment
reservation as set out in point no. 6.
[2] We conclude that the report of the
MSBCC under the Chairmanship of Justice
Gaikwad is based on quantifiable and
conclusively     established     the    social,
economical and educational backwardness of
the Maratha community and it has also
representation of the Maratha community in
public employment / posts under the State.
Accordingly we uphold the MSBCC report.
classification of the Maratha class into
“Socially    and    Educationally      Backward
reasonable     classification       permissible
under Article 14 of the Constitution of
differentia and (b) rational nexus to the
object sought to be achieved.
[4] We hold and declare that the limit of
reservation should not exceed 50%, however
in exceptional circumstances and extra-
ordinary situations, this limit can be
crossed    subject   to    availability    of
quantifiable    and   contemporaneous    data
reflecting   backwardness,    inadequacy   of
representation and without affecting the
efficiency in administration.
[5] We hold and declare that the report of
the Gaikwad Commission has set out the
exceptional    circumstances    and    extra-
ordinary situations justifying crossing of
the limit of 50% reservation as set out in
Indra Sawhney's case.
[6] We hold and declare that the State
Government in exercise of its enabling
power under Articles 15(4)(5) and 16(4) of
the Constitution of India is justified, in
the backdrop of report of MSBCC, in making
provision for separate reservation to
Maratha community. We, however, hold that
the quantum of reservation set out by the
Maharashtra State Reservation for Seats
for Admission in Educational Institutions
in the State and for appointments in the
public services and posts under the State
(for Socially and Educationally Backward
Classes) SEBC Act, 2018, in section 4(1)
(a) and 4(1)(b) as 16% is not justifiable
and resultantly we quash and set aside the
quantum of reservation under the said
provisions over and above 12% and 13%
respectively    as   recommended    by    the
In view of the conclusions, the High Court
passed following order in the batch of writ
[A] In the light of summary of conclusions
above, we dispose of the following writ
petitions / PILs by upholding the Impugned
quantum   of  reservation   prescribed   by
section 4(1)(a) and 4(1)(b) of the said
7] WP (Lodg. No.) 4128 of 2018.
9] PIL No. 6 of 2019.
10] WP (Lodg No.) 969 of 2019.
[B] The following writ petitions / PILs
seeking implementation of the Impugned Act
of 2018, are also disposed of in view of
the Impugned Act being upheld except to
the extent of quantum of reservation
prescribed by section 4(1)(a) and 4(1)(b).
is allowed in terms of prayer clause
2] PIL No.181 of 2018 :- The petition
is allowed in terms of prayer clause
petitioner to file a fresh petition in
case cause of action survives.
[C] The following writ petitions        are
rendered infructuous on account of      the
passing of SEBC Act of 2018 which       has
repealed the earlier ESBC Act of 2015.
1] Writ Petition (Stamp No.) 10755 of
7] Writ Petition No. 3151 of 2014.”
[D] The following writ petitions are de-
tagged from the present group of petitions
as they claim reservation for the Muslim
communities.
4] PIL (Stamp No.) 1914 of 2019.
[E] WP No.11368 of 2016:- The Petition is
dismissed as far as prayer clause (A) is
concerned the petitioner is at liberty to
file an appropriate Writ Petition seeking
said relief.
[F] PIL (Stamp No.) 36115 of 2018 :- The
is disposed of since the recommendation of
the commission are implemented in form of
the impugned SEBC Act, 2018.
[G] In the light of disposal of above writ
petitions and PILs, all pending civil
applications / notice of motions / Chamber
Summons taken out in these writ petitions
and PILs do not survive and the same are
accordingly disposed of.”
37. Aggrieved with the impugned judgment of the High
Court dated 27.06.2019, the appellants have filed
the Civil Appeals noted above in this Court.
38. We   have  heard   Shri   Arvind   P.  Datar,  learned
senior counsel, Shri Shyam Divan,          learned senior
counsel,   Shri   Gopal    Sankaranarayanan,       learned
senior   counsel,   Shri  Pradeep    Sancheti,     learned
senior counsel, Dr. Rajiv Dhawan,          learned senior
counsel,   Shri  Sidharth    Bhatnagar,    learned  senior
counsel,    Shri   B.H.   Marlapalle,     learned   senior
counsel, Shri R.K. Deshpande, learned counsel, Dr.
Gunratan   Sadavarte,   learned   senior    counsel,  Shri
Amit Anand Tiwari, learned counsel and Shri S.B.
Talekar, learned counsel for the appellants. Shri
Amol B. Karande, learned counsel, has been heard in
support of Writ Petition No.938 of 2020.
39. We   have   heard   Shri   K.K.   Venugopal,   learned
Attorney General for India and Shri Tushar Mehta,
learned    Solicitor    General.    Shri   Mukul   Rohatgi,
learned senior counsel, has appeared for the State
of   Maharashtra    and   Chhattisgarh.      Shri   Shekhar
Naphade,    learned   senior    counsel,   and   Shri   P.S.
Patwalia, learned senior counsel, have also appeared
for   the  State   of  Maharashtra.    Shri   Kapil   Sibal,
learned senior counsel, has appeared for the State
of   Jharkhand.   Dr.   Abhishek   Manu  Singhvi,   learned
senior counsel, has also appeared for the respondent
No.3 in C.A. No.3123 of 2020.
40. We    have  also    heard   several   learned   counsel
appearing for different States. Shri Manish Kumar,
learned counsel has appeared for the State of Bihar,
Shri Karan Bharihok, has appeared for the State of
Punjab, Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior         counsel,
has appeared for the State of Rajasthan. Shri C.U.
Singh,    learned senior counsel, has appeared for the
respondents. Shri Sudhanshu S. Choudhari,           learned
counsel has appeared for some of the respondents,
Shri   V.   Shekhar,       learned   senior    counsel   has
appeared    for  the   State   of   Maharashtra,   Shri   S.
Niranjan    Reddy,       learned    senior    counsel,  has
appeared    for   the   State  of   Andhra   Pradesh,  Shri
Shekhar Nephade,       learned senior counsel and Shri
Jayanth    Muth    Raj,   learned   senior    counsel  have
appeared for the State of Tamil Nadu. Shri Jaideep
Gupta, learned senior counsel has appeared for the
State   of    Karnataka.    Shri   Vinay   Arora,   learned
counsel, has appeared for the State of Uttarakhand.
Shri Arun Bhardwaj, learned counsel, has appeared
for the State of Haryana. Shri Amit Kumar, learned
counsel, has appeared for the State of Meghalaya.
Shri Pradeep Misra, learned counsel, has appeared
for the State of U.P. and Shri Tapesh Kumar Singh,
learned counsel, has appeared for the Madhya Pradesh
Public Service Commission. Ms. Diksha Rai, learned
counsel, has appeared for the State of Assam.
41. We   have   also    heard  Mrs.   Mahalakshmi   Pavani,
learned   senior    counsel,   Shri  A.P.   Singh,  learned
counsel, Mr. Shriram Pingle,        learned counsel, Shri
V.K.  Biju,      learned   counsel,   Shri   Hrishikesh  s.
Chitaley,    learned counsel, Shri Mr. Kaleeswaram Raj,
learned   counsel,    and    Shri    Ashok    Arora   for
intervenors.   Mr.  Akash    Avinash   Kakade   has  also
appeared for the interveners.
42. Learned   counsel   for    the  parties    have  made
elaborate submissions on the six questions as noted
above. Learned counsel for the parties have also
made their respective submissions on the points for
consideration as was formulated by the High Court in
the  impugned   judgment.   The   elaborate   submissions
have also been made by the petitioners challenging
the various provisions of Act, 2018. Learned counsel
appearing for the petitioners have made scratching
attack on the Gaikwad Commission’s report, various
data  and  details   have   been   referred   to  by  the
petitioners   to   support    their   submissions    that
Maratha   community     is    not    a    socially    and
educationally backward class.
43. We shall now proceed to notice the submission
advanced by learned counsel including submissions of
Attorney General for India in seriatim.
(4)Submissions of the parties.
44. Shri Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel, led
the arguments on behalf of the appellant. Shri Datar
submits that there is no need to refer the judgment
of Constitution Bench of this Court in Indra Sawhney
to an Eleven-Judge Bench. Reference to larger Bench
can be made only for compelling reasons. No judgment
of this Court has doubted the correctness of nine-
Judge  Constitution  Bench   of  this   Court  in  Indra
Sawhney's  case.  On  the  other   hand  50%  limit  for
reservation has been reiterated at least by four
Constitution Bench judgments of this Court rendered
after judgment in Indra Sawhney's case.         All the
High Courts have uniformly accepted the limit of 50%
reservation.  In  some   States   where   for  political
reasons 50% limit had been breached, it was struck
down repeatedly. The limit of 50% reservation laid
down  by  the Constitution   Bench   of  this  Court  in
Indra Sawhney is now an integral part of the trinity
of Article 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution. Any
legislative or executive legislations against it are
void and have to be struck down.         Shri Datar has
specifically  referred    to   the   Constitution    Bench
judgment of this Court in M. Nagaraj vs. Union of
India,  (2006)   8   SCC    212   in   which    case   the
Constitution Bench of this Court laid down that the
State    cannot    obliterate      the     Constitutional
requirement of ceiling limit of 50%. It was held
that if the ceiling limit of 50% is breached the
structure  of  quality   and  equality    in  Article   16
would collapse.
45. It was further held that even the State has
compelling reason, the State has to see that its
reservation provision does not lead to excessiveness
so as to breach the limit of 50%.        The request to
refer the judgment of Nagaraj has been refused by
subsequent Constitution Bench judgment of this Court
in Jarnail Singh and others vs. Lachhmi Narain Gupta
and others, 2018(10) SCC 396. The parameters, when
this Court revisits its judgments have been clearly
laid down in which the present case does not fall.
The judgment delivered by nine-Judge Bench needs to
be followed under the principle of stare decisis.
More so for the last more than 28 years no judgment
of this Court had expressed any doubt about the law
laid down by this Court in Indra Sawhney's case. A
very high threshold is to be crossed when reference
is   to  be   made  to   eleven-Judge    Bench.   In   law,
certainty,   consistency    and  continuity    are   highly
desirable. The Parliament has not touched 50% limit
laid   down  under   Article   15(4)  and   16(4)  of   the
Constitution for the last several decades.
46. The impugned judgment of the Bombay High Court
is liable to be set aside as it is contrary to the
clear principle laid down in the Indra Sawhney's
case. The High Court has not given any reason as to
how   extra-ordinary     situations    as   mentioned    in
paragraph 810 in Indra Sawhney case is made out in
the    context   of    reservation    for    the   Maratha
caste/community     in    Maharashtra.    Exception     and
certain    extra-ordinary     situations    to   the    50%
principle carved out in Indra Sawhney does not cover
the case of Maratha since such “rule is confined to
far flung and remote areas, where they are out of
main stream of national life”. Indra Sawhney has
also mandated extreme caution for going beyond 50%.
The reservation limit of 50% has also been applied
in the decisions rendered in the context of Article
243D and 243T of the Constitution of India relating
to   Panchayats    and   Municipalities.     The   earlier
reports of National Commission for Backward Classes
has  rejected   claim   of Maratha   to   be  included  in
backward class. The opinion of National Commission
for Backward Classes cannot be disregarded by the
State and in the event it had any grievance remedy
of review was provided.
47. The   Maratha   community   has  been    found  to  be
socially   advanced    and  prestigious    caste.   It  is
submitted that limit of 50% is essential right on
part of equality which is part of basic structure.
Even members of Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Classes who qualify on merit can continue to enjoy
the benefit of merit quota. The limit of 50% as laid
down   in   Indra    Sawhney,   only    a    Parliamentary
amendment    is   contemplated.    Whenever     Parliament
wanted to get over 50% ceiling limit laid down by
Indra   Sawhney,   the   constitutional     Amendments   were
brought,   namely,    Constitution     77th   Amendment   and
48. Shri Datar has referred to various paragraphs of
judgment of this Court in Indra Sawhney. In support
of his submission that majority has laid down upper
ceiling   of   50%   for    providing   reservation     under
Article 16(4) and 15(4), Shri Datar submits that the
judgment of Indra Sawhney cannot be confined only to
Article 16(4) but the law was laid down taking into
consideration Article 15(4) and 16(4).
49. Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel for the
appellant/writ    petitioner    submits    that   social  and
financial    status    of   Maratha   community     has  been
examined by successive Commissions or Committees up
to   June   2013   and    each   of  the    Commission    and
Committee    did   not    recognise   members    of   Maratha
community as deserving for reservation as backward
class.    Shri   Divan      has   referred     to    Kalelkar
(1980) and National Backward Class Commission Report
(2000).   He    has   also   referred    to   the   Deshmukh
Committee report which did not include the Maratha
Community    in   the   list   of   backward   communities.
Reference    has    also   been    made   to    the   Khatri
Commission (1995) and Bapat Commission (2008).
50. It is submitted that when the Maharashtra State
Commission for backward class declined to reconsider
in the matter of reservation of Maratha, the State
Government appointed Narayan Rane Committee who was
a Minister in the State Government which submitted a
report in 2014 that although Maratha Community may
not be socially backward but it recommended a new
Socially   and   Economically     Backward   Class   (SEBC).
Shri   Divan  has   submitted    that  Gaikwad    Commission
which submitted its Report on 15.11.2018 concluding
that Maratha Community in Maharashtra are socially,
educationally     and   economically    backward    and  are
eligible to be included in backward class category
is   completely    flawed.   It   was  not   open   for  the
Gaikwad    Commission     to   ignore    determination    by
National Commission and State Committees/Commission
until June 2013 holding that Maratha are forward
class in the State of Maharashtra. The report failed
to recognize the consequences of Maratha Community
being politically organised and being the dominant
political class in Maharashtra for several decades.
Politically     organised     classes      that     dominate
government are not backward in any Constitutional
sense.
51. Coming   to   the  Constitution     (One   Hundred   and
Second  Amendment),    2018,   Shri   Divan   submits   that
102nd   Constitution     Amendment      now    contemplates
identification   by   National   Commission    of   Backward
Classes.   The     Constitutional      scheme    which    is
delineated  by   Article   341  and   342   has   also  been
borrowed  in   Article   342A.    The   identification    of
backward classes is now centralized. Shri Divan has
also highlighted adverse impact of the impugned act
on medical admission in the State of Maharashtra.
52. Law laid down by Constitution Bench in Indra
Sawhney’s case that reservation under Article 15(4)
and 16(4) should not exceed the upper limit of 50
percent has been followed and reiterated by several
judgments of this Court including Constitution Bench
judgments.   The  Gaikwad    Commission    report  and   the
reason given by the report does not make out any
case for exception regarding Maratha Community to
fall in extraordinary circumstances as contemplated
in paragraph 810 of the judgment in Indra Sawhney’s
case.
53. Shri   Gopal    Sankaranarayanan,      learned    senior
Counsel has made his submission on the Constitution
(One   Hundred   and   Second    Amendment),    2018.   Shri
Narayanan submits that after the Constitution (One
Hundred   and   Second   Amendment),     2018,   the   State
legislature   could   not   have   passed   the  2018   Act.
Article 338B and 342A brought by the Constitution
(One Hundred and Second Amendment), mark see change
in   the entire   regime   regarding    identification    of
backward    classes.    The    power   of    the   National
Commission of Backward Classes as per Article 338B
sub-clause (5) includes power to make reports and
recommendations on measures that should be taken by
the Union or any State. The National Commission for
Backward Class is also required to be now consulted
both by the Union and the State. Article 366(26)
states that the phrase ‘Socially, Educationally and
Backward Classes’ means such Backward Classes as are
so deemed under Article 342A, for the purposes of
this Constitution which provision does not permit
Socially, Educationally and Backward Classes to have
any     other     meaning.     The    purposes     of    this
Constitution, as occurring in Article 366(26C) shall
also apply to Article 16(4). After the Constitution
(One Hundred and Second Amendment), the States have
no   power   to  identify    socially,   educationally    and
backward classes. The State Governments are still
left    free   to   decide    the   nature   or   extent   of
provision that may be made in favour of socially and
educationally       backward     classes    identified     in
accordance    with    Article   342A.  When   the  power   to
determine SCs and STs have always been centralized,
it   is  absurd    to   suggest   that  allowing   the   same
procedure       for      identification     of     socially,
educationally   and   backward    classes    shall  violate
federalism.
54. Shri  Gopal    Sankaranarayanan     further   submitted
that  the  reliance    on   Select   Committee   Report  of
Rajya Sabha is unwarranted. In the Select Committee
Report which was submitted in July 2018, there were
several dissents, since many members of the Select
Committee   understood     that   the   Constitution   (One
Hundred and Second Amendment), shall take away the
power of the State to prepare their own list of
socially,    educationally      and    backward    classes.
Article 342A has been brought in the Constitution to
achieve uniformity and certainty and not due to any
political reasons. There is no ambiguity in Article
342A   which     requires     any     external    aid   for
interpretation.
55. Shri    Sidharth      Bhatnagar,     learned    counsel
appearing   for    the    appellant     also   adopts   the
submissions     of    Mr.     Datar     and    Mr.    Gopal
Sankaranarayanan and submits that the judgment of
this Court in M.R. Balaji versus State of Mysore,
AIR 1963 SC 649,had laid down that reservation under
Article 15(4) shall be less than 50 percent which
principle    finds   its  approval  in   Indra   Sawhney’s
Case.In   Indra   Sawhney’s   Case,  Eight   out  of   Nine
Judges took the view that reservation cannot exceed
50   percent.   He   submits   that  judgment    of   Indra
Sawhney need not be referred to a larger Bench.
56. Mr. Pradeep Sancheti, learned senior Advocate,
has    confined    his   submissions   to    the    Gaikwad
Commission Report. He submits that due difference to
the opinion of the Commission does not mean that
opinion formed is beyond the judicial scrutiny. He
submits    that   backwardness   has   to   be   based   on
objective factors where inadequacy has to factually
exist. The Court while exercising power of Judicial
Review has to consider the substance of the matter
and not its form, the appearance or the cloak, or
the veil of the executive action is to be carefully
scrutinized and if it appears that Constitutional
power has been transgressed, the impugned action has
to be struck down.
57. Shri    Sancheti    submitted    that  three    National
Backward Class Commissions and three State Backward
Class Commissions did not include Maratha Community
as   backward   community    which  findings   and   reasons
could   not    have   been    given   a  goby   by   Gaikwad
Commission constituted in the year 2017. The Gaikwad
Commission (hereinafter referred to as Commission),
survey, data results, analysis suffers from various
inherent flaws. The sample survey conducted by the
Commission    is   skewed,   unscientific   and  cannot    be
taken as a representative sample. Sample size is
very small. Out of 43,629 persons surveyed, only 950
persons   were     from   the   Urban   Area.   Mumbai    was
excluded   from    the   Survey.   Sample   size   of   total
population     was    well    below   0.02   percent.     The
Commission assumes that the Maratha form 30 percent
of the State’s population. Without there being any
quantifiable     data,   the   Commission   picked    up  and
chose certain parameters whereas conveniently left
out many of the parameters where Maratha Community
is better off. The Commission has not provided a
comparable  State  average  for  at  least  28  of  the
parameters used in the study. When the State Average
is not on the record, treating those parameters as
parameters of backwardness is wholly unfounded. The
High Court in the impugned judgment has also not met
the submissions which were brought on record before
the High Court regarding the serious flaws committed
by the Commission.
58. The marking system adopted by the Commission was
not rational; the Constitution of the Commission and
experts   was  loaded   in  favour    of  the   Maratha
community since the majority of the members of the
Commission were all Marathas. It is submitted that
Marathas are the most dominant community not only in
politics   but   also   in   other   fields   such   as
educational     institutions,      sugar     factories,
agriculture etc. which aspects are relevant criteria
for  identifying  backwardness   of  a  community.  The
sample size was so small that no quantifiable data
could have been found.
59. Referring   to   Chapter   10   of   the  Commission’s
report, Shri Sancheti submits that no extraordinary
situation   as   contemplated    in    paragraph    810   of
judgment of Indra Sawhney’s case could be made out,
even if all the findings given by the Commission are
accepted to be true. The Commission has relied on
outdated   data   for  holding    that    ‘Marathas’    were
‘Shudras’. When an unscientific survey is done, an
unrealistic result is bound to come. There has been
adequate representation of Maratha Community in the
Public  Services.   The  Commission     erred   in  holding
that  the  representation    is   not   proportionate    and
recommended   reservation    under   Article   16(4).    The
Commission has not even adverted to the requirement
regarding efficiency as contemplated under Article
335 of the Constitution of India.
60. Shri Sancheti submits that more than 40 percent
Members of Parliament and 50 percent of Members of
Legislative   Assembly   are   Marathas.    Shri   Sancheti
submits   that   the   Commission’s      report    is   only
paperwork which could not be accepted by the Court,
while the Act, 2018, purports to create reservation
for socially and economically Backward Classes but
in   effect  the  enactment   is    reservation   for  only
Maratha which enactment is not sustainable.
61. Shri Sancheti submits that from the various data
regarding    representation      in    jobs   of    Maratha
community    itself   make    it    clear   that    Maratha
community    is  adequately     represented     in   Public
Services and there is no Constitutional requirement
for providing reservation under Article 16(4). Shri
Sancheti submits that the Commission has given undue
importance to the suicide by the Maratha farmers. He
submits that from the data given in the report, the
proportion   of  suicide   of  Maratha    comes   to  23.56
percent which is even less from the proportion of 30
percent as claimed by the Commission. The High Court
by wrong appreciation of facts concludes that those
who committed suicide, 80.28 percent were Marathas.
There is no basis to attribute farmer suicide to
Maratha   Backwardness.   Shri    Sancheti   submits   that
undue weightage has been given to the percentage of
Maratha in ‘Dubbeywala class’ which cannot be any
relevant consideration.
62.   Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, appearing on behalf of the
appellant, submits that no case has been made out to
review or refer the judgment of this Court in Indra
Sawhney’s  case   which  is  based  on  principles   of
equality and reasonableness. Dr. Dhavan submits that
in fact Indra Sawhney should be strengthened to make
50 percent strict subject to dire restrictions and
stronger judicial review. The Indra Sawhney should
be treated as a comprehensive decision on various
aspects of reservation as a whole and the attempt of
the respondents to distinguish Indra Sawhney on the
basis that it was a decision only on Article 16(4)
is spurious.
63. Dr.   Dhavan,   however,   submits   that   in  the
judgment of Indra Sawhney, a weak test for judicial
scrutiny    in   matters    within    the    subjective
satisfaction of the scrutiny was laid down i.e. test
as laid down by this Court in Barium Chemicals ltd.
and another versus The Company Law Board and others,
AIR 1967 SC 295. Dr. Dhavan submits that there ought
to be a strict scrutiny test and this Court may
tweak   this   aspect   of   Indra   Sawhney   so   that  the
strict scrutiny test applies. The 50 percent test as
has been articulated in the Indra Sawhney is based
on the principle of giving everyone a fair chance.
50 percent ceiling is based on principle of equality
to prevent reverse discrimination which is as much a
principle that the Constitution records to equality
as anything else. The direction of Indra Sawhney
that   list   of  Other   Backward    Classes   be   reviewed
periodically     is  not   being   followed.    Dr.   Dhavan,
however,     submits     that    the    entire    power    of
reservation has not been taken away from the State.
64. Elaborating his submissions on the Constitution
(One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, Dr.
Dhavan submits that the essence of 102nd Amendment
as   exemplified    in   Article    342A   results    in  the
monopoly       of      identification        even      though
implementation is left to the State. His submission
is that this is contrary to the basic structure of
federalism of the Constitution. In that it deprived
the States of the crucial power of identification
which was a very important power of the State under
Article 15, 16 and 46. The obligation of the State
in   Article    15,    16    and    46    continue    to  be
comprehensive.
65. Alternate submissions advanced by Dr. Dhavan is
that Article 342A can be read down to describe the
power  of   the  Centre    in   relation    to  the  Central
Services    and    leaving     the     identification    and
implementation    power    of   the   States    intact.  Dr.
Dhavan,     however,      submits       that     Maharashtra
legislature had the competence to enact the 2018
Act, even though the Constitution (One Hundred and
Second   Amendment)    had    come    by   that   time.  He,
however,   submits    that    any   legislation    which  is
enacted will still be subject to Indra Sawhney and
Nagraj principles.
66. Dr.   Dhavan    submits    that    various   reports  of
Maharashtra in fact found that it is not necessary
to include Maratha despite their persistent efforts.
He submits that the test to be applied is “what has
happened since the last report negating inclusion of
Maratha that now requires a change to include them”.
He submits that the logic of the principle is that
if the Marathas were not backward for over Seventy
years, how they have suddenly become backward now.
Dr. Dhavan reiterates his submission that there is
no   judgment  which has  questioned Indra Sawhney's
case. He submits that reservation under political
pressure, social pressure need not to be taken. A
political   obligation to  the  electorate is  not  a
constitutional obligation. He further submits that
object of Article 16(4) is empowerment i.e. sharing
of the State power. He submits that Maratha are not
deprived of sharing power; hence, no case is made
out for granting reservation under Article 16(4).
67. Shri B.H. Marlapalle, learned senior counsel,
has also submitted that doctrine of extraordinary
circumstances cannot be applied to a dominant class
of Society. He submits that the representation of
Maratha in the Legislative Assembly of the State is
more than 50 percent and in the Cabinet of the State
they are more than 50 percent. After enforcement of
the Constitution, Marathas were never regarded as an
and three State Commissions have rejected the claim
of the Marathas to be backward.
68. Shri  S.B.  Talekar,  appearing  in  Civil  Appeal
No.3126 of 2020 has submitted that Writ Petition
No.3846 of 2019 was filed by Mohd. Saeed Noori &
Others, claiming reservation for Muslims. The High
Court although noted the submissions but had made no
consideration.  Learned  Counsel  contended  that  the
State has no legislative competence to enact the
2018 Act. He submits that power to legislate on the
subject  has  been  taken  away  by  virtue  of  102nd
Constitutional Amendment by adding Article 342A in
the Constitution of India. He also questioned the
composition of Gaikwad Commission.
69. Shri R.K. Deshpande, appearing for the appellant
has also contended that by Article 342A, a separate
mechanism has been introduced for the purpose of
identification of backward class. He submits that
there  cannot    be   any  State  list    of   ‘Socially    and
Educationally     Backward    Class’     after     the    102nd
Constitutional        Amendment.     He      submits       that
identification of the caste was never the exclusive
domain of the States.
70. Shri    Amit    Anand   Tiwari,    appearing     in    writ
petition i.e. W.P. No.504 of 2020, referring to the
Order  dated    09.09.2020    contends    that    Three-Judge
Bench having refused the prayer to refer the Indra
Sawhney judgment to a larger Bench, the Said prayer
needs no further consideration. Shri Tiwari submits
that   present     is   not   a   case     covered     by   any
exceptional circumstances as mentioned in the Indra
Sawhney’s judgment. Historically, Marathas have been
treated   as   a    forward   class    who    are   socially,
economically and politically well-of. Prior to the
report   of   Gaikwad     Commission,    as    many    as   six
Commissions have held Marathas are not entitled to
be treated as a backward class. There has been no
change   in   the    circumstances    to    include    Maratha
Community   in  the   list   of   Backward  Classes.    With
respect   to   102nd   Constitutional     Amendment,    shri
Tiwari submits that now States are not empowered to
notify   a    class    of   persons    as   socially     and
educationally    backward    for   the  purposes    of   the
Constitution.     However,    State’s   power   to    confer
benefits on an already identified class of persons
as SEBC as identified under Article 342A remains
intact. The High Court committed an error in holding
that States still have power to identify class as
SEBC. The High Court erred in not appreciating the
import of Article 366(26C).
71. We   may   also   notice    the  submission    of   writ
petitioner     in    W.P.(civil)      No.938    of     2020,
challenging the 102nd Constitutional Amendment Act,
72. Shri Amol B. Karande, learned counsel for the
petitioner submits that in event Article 342A read
with Article 366(26C) of the Constitution of India
takes away the power of the State to identify a
backward   class,   the   said  Constitutional   Amendment
shall   be   violative     of   basic   feature     of   the
Constitution, i.e. Federalism.
73. He further submits that by the Constitutional
Amendment, the power of the State to legislate under
various Entries under List-II and List-III have been
taken away, hence, it was obligatory to follow the
procedure as prescribed in Proviso to Article 368(2)
of the Constitution of India, which having not done,
the Constitutional Amendment is not valid.
74. Learned Counsel submits that Article 366(26C)
requires   certain    clarification   since   there   is  no
clarity regarding Central List and State List. He
submits   that   States    shall   have  still    power   to
legislate   on   the   identification   of   the   backward
class.
has  made   submissions    on  the  102nd   Constitutional
Amendment.   Shri    Venugopal   submits   that   he   shall
confine his arguments on the 102nd Constitutional
Amendment   only.    Referring   to  Article    12   of  the
Constitution, the learned Attorney General submits
that   the   definition    of    the   “State      includes
Government and Parliament of India and Government
and Legislature of each State.” Under Article 15(4)
and  16(4),  the   State  has  power    to   identify    the
‘Socially and Educationally Backward Class/Backward
Class’ and take affirmative action in favour of such
classes which power has been regularly exercised by
the State.
76. Learned    Attorney   General    submits     that    the
Constitution Bench in Indra Sawhney held that there
ought to be a permanent body, in the nature of a
Commission or a Tribunal to which inclusion and non-
inclusion of groups, classes and Sections in the
list  of  Other  Backward   Classes   can   be  made.    The
Constitution    Bench    directed     both     the    Union
Government and the State Government to constitute
such   permanent   mechanism   in    the    nature    of    a
77. Learned   Attorney   General   submits    that   it   is
inconceivable   that  no  State   shall    have   power   to
identify backward class, the direction issued by the
Nine-Judge Bench still continuing. He has referred
to the judgment delivered by Justice Jeevan Reddy
for  himself   and   three  other    Judges  and   judgment
delivered by Justice Thommen and submits that the
above   directions     were    the    directions    of   the
majority. Learned Attorney General submits that no
such amendment has been made by which the effect of
Article   15(4)   and   16(4)   have   been  impacted.    He
submits that National Backward Class Commission Act,
1993 was passed in obedience of direction of this
Court  in   Indra   Sawhney’s    case.    He submits    that
Section 2(C) of 1993 Act refers to a Central list.
Learned   Attorney    General    has    also  referred    to
Maharashtra Act No.34 of 2006, especially Section
2(C), 2(E) and Section 9(1) which refers to State
List. He submits that Article 342A was to cover the
Central   list   alone,   the    1993   Act,  having    been
repealed   on  14.08.2018.    The   Attorney   General   has
also  referred    to   Select    Committee   Report    dated
17.07.2017, paragraph 12, 18, 19 and 55 and submits
that  Select    Committee   Report     indicate   that   the
intention     of   Constitutional   Amendment   was  not  to
take away the State’s power to identify the Backward
Class, the Select Committee Report clearly indicate
that State’s Commission shall continue to perform
their duties.
78. Learned Attorney General submits that Central
List as contemplated under Article 342A (2) relates
to   employment     under  the   Union  Government,   Public
Sector Corporation, Central institutions in States
where Central list was to be utilized. He submits
that    State    Government   identification   of   Backward
Class/Socially and Educationally Backward Classes is
not touched by Article 342A.
79. Referring       to  Scheduled   Castes   and  Scheduled
Tribes    learned    Attorney   General  submits   that  the
power     was    given   to   the   President    under   the
Constitutional Scheme and States had no concern at
all    with    Scheduled    Castes/Scheduled    Tribes.   He
submits that Article 342A deals with the Central
List for its own purpose whereas in every State,
there is a separate State list of Other Backward
Class. There was no attempt to modify Articles 15(4)
and 16(4) by the Parliament. Unless Articles 15(4)
and 16(4) are amended, the State’s power cannot be
touched.
80. Learned Attorney General had also referred to an
affidavit filed on behalf of Government of India in
Writ  Petition   (Civil)   No.12   of   2021,    Dinesh   B.
versus Union of India and others, in which affidavit
Union of India with respect to the Constitution (One
Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018 has pleaded
that power to identify and specify the Socially and
Educationally    Backward     Class    list     lies    with
Parliament, only with reference to Central List of
Socially  and   Educationally    Backward    Class.   It  is
further pleaded that the State Government may have
their   separate    State    list    for    Socially     and
Educationally   Backward   Class   for   the   purposes   of
providing reservation to the recruitment to State
Government   Services   or    admission    to    the   State
Attorney   General   reiterates    the   above    stand   in
respect of the Constitution (One Hundred and Second
81. Referring to the Other Backward Caste list, with
regard to the State of Punjab, the learned Attorney
General submits that in the Central list, there are
68 castes and whereas in the State list, there are
71 castes. Learned Attorney General submits that the
question   of  validity    of   the   Constitution   (One
Hundred and Second Amendment) shall arise only when
the State’s power is taken away. Replying to the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the writ
petitioner in W.P.No.938 of 2020, learned Attorney
General  submits    that   in   the   Constitution   (One
Hundred   and   Second    Amendment),    there   was   no
applicability   of   proviso   to   Article  368(2).   He
submits that insofar as legislation under List-III
is concerned, since Parliament by legislation can
override   the   States,    hence,    by  Constitutional
Amendment, the same can very well be taken away.
82. Referring to Entry number 41 of List-II, the
learned Attorney General submits that Entry 41 has
no concern with identification of backward class.
The Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment)
does not amend the lists under Schedule VII; hence,
there    is   no   requirement     of   ratification    by  the
83. Shri     Mukul    Rohtagi,    learned    senior   counsel,
appearing for the State of Maharashtra has led the
arguments.       Shri     Rohtagi    has    articulated     his
submissions in a very effective manner. Shri Rohtagi
states    that    his   submission     shall  be   principally
confined to question No.1.
84. Shri     Rohtagi     submits   that   there  are    several
reasons which require that the Constitution Bench
judgment       in     Indra      Sawhney     be     revisited,
necessitating      reference     to   the   larger   Bench   of
Eleven     Judges.     Shri   Rohtagi     during    course   of
submission has handed over a chart giving history of
judgments on reservation. The chart makes reference
of   the   relevant     paragraphs    of  judgments    of  this
Court in M.R.Balaji versus State of Mysore(Supra),T.
Devadasan versus Union of India and another, AIR
(1964) SC 179, State of Punjab versus Hiralal and
others, (1970) 3 SCC 567; State of Kerala and others
versus N.M. Thomas and others, (1976) 2 SCC 310;
versus Union of India and others, (1981) 1 SCC 246;
K.C.   Vasant   Kumar   and   another   versus    State   of
Karnataka,   (1985)   supp.   (1)  SCC   714;   T.M.A.   Pai
Foundation and others versus State of Karnataka and
others, (2002) 8 SCC 481, M. Nagaraj and others
versus Union of India and others, (2006) 8 SCC 212;
S.V.Joshi versus State of Karnataka, (2012) 7 SCC
41; Union of India and others versus Rakesh Kumar
and others, (2010) 4 SCC 50; K. Krishnamurthy and
others versus Union of India and another ,(2010) 7
SCC 202; Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao versus State of
kishanrao Gawali versus The State of Maharashtra,
(2021)   SCC  Online   SC   170  and  Constitution     Bench
judgment of this Court in Indra Sawhney. The Chart
also   indicates   the    reasons  why    Indra   Sawhney’s
judgment    requires    a   review.   The    Chart    in    a
comprehensive     manner     discloses     the     law    on
reservation prior to Indra Sawhney and subsequent
thereto.
85. We may now notice the Grounds which have been
emphasized by Shri Mukul Rohtagi for referring the
judgment of Indra Sawhney to a larger Bench.
(5)The 10 grounds urged for referring Indra Sawhney
judgment to a larger Bench.
i)    In the judgment of Indra Sawhney, there is no
unanimity,     in   view    of   different    reasoning
adopted in six separate judgments delivered in
the case. He submits that the judgments are in
three groups – one containing the judgment of
Justice Jeevan Reddy, which is for himself and
three   other   judges,   which   held  that   while  50
percent is the rule but in certain extraordinary
situations,    it  can   be   breached.   Shri   Rohtagi
submits that Justice Pandian and Justice Sawant
have  held    that   50  percent    can  be   breached,
hence, the majority opinion is that 50 percent
can  be   breached.   It   is  only  Justice    Thommen,
Justice Kuldip Singh and Justice R.M. Sahai who
have held that 50 percent cannot be breached. He
submits that the judgment of majority opinion in
Indra Sawhney is being wrongly read as holding
that   50   percent is   the  ceiling  limit   for
reservation.
ii) Different judges from 1963 till date have spoken
in different voice with regard to reservation
under 15(4) and 16(4) which is a good ground to
refer Indra Sawhney judgment to a larger Bench.
iii)The Balaji has held that Article 15(4) is an
exception to Article 15(1) which theory has not
been accepted by this Court in N.M. Thomas as
well as Indra Sawhney, the very basis of fixing
the ceiling of 50 percent has gone. Shri Rohtagi
submits   that  the Constitution  of  India  is   a
living document. The ideas cannot remain frozen,
even the thinking of framers of the Constitution
cannot remain frozen for times immemorial.
iv)Neither Article 16(4) nor Article 15(4) contains
any   percentage.   The   Court  cannot   read    a
percentage    i.e.     50    percent     for     effecting
reservation    under    Article    15(4)     and   Article
16(4), providing a ceiling by number is cutting
down the Constitutional provisions of Part-III
and   Part-IV.     Indra    Sawhney’s      judgment    has
restricted the sweep of Article 15 and Article
16  of   the    Constitution.      The    Constitutional
provisions cannot be read down which principle
is applicable only with regard to statutes.
v) Judgment    of   Indra    Sawhney    is   a   judgment   on
Article 16(4) and not on Article 15(4), hence,
the  ratio   of   judgment   cannot    be   applied   with
regard to Article 15(4). He submits that Indra
Sawhney  itself     states   that   Article    15(4)   and
Article    16(4)     are   distinct      and     different
provisions.
vi)The judgment of Indra Sawhney does not consider
the  impact    of   Directive    Principles      of  State
Policy such as Article 39(b)(c) and Article 46,
While interpreting Article 14, 16(1) and 16(4).
vii)The 50 percentage ceiling limit was followed by
Constitution    Bench    of    this    Court     in   St.
Stephen’s   College   versus    University    of   Delhi,
(1992) 1 SCC 558, by upholding the procedure for
admission    of    students      in   aided     minority
educational institutions which ceiling limit of
50 percent has been set aside by 11-Judge Bench
judgment in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (Supra). 11-
Judge  Bench   judgment     in   T.M.A.   Pai   judgment
indicates that the ceiling of 50 percent is no
longer   available   to    be   relied   on    even   for
purposes of Article 15 and Article 16.
viii)The Constitutional 77th and 81st          Amendment Act
inserting Article 16(4)(A) and Article 16(4)(B)
have the effect of undoing in part the judgment
of Indra Sawhney and thus mandating a re-look.
ix)The   103rd  Constitutional     Amendment    by  which   10
percent   reservation     have    been   provided     for
Economically    Weaker   Sections     in   addition    to
reservation    given    under     Article    15(4)    and
Article 16(4) is a clear pointer of overruling
of  50  percent  ceiling    for  reservation   under
15(4) and 16(4).
x)   The extraordinary circumstances as indicated in
paragraph 810 of Indra Sawhney’s case         is not
exhaustive, far flung and remote areas mentioned
therein  are  only   illustrative.    There  may  be
other exceptions where states are entitled to
exceed the 50 percent ceiling limit.
86. Shri P.S. Patwalia, appearing for the State of
Maharashtra has advanced the submissions on rest of
the     questions.   Shri    Patwalia      has   advanced
submissions    supporting    the    report    of  Gaikwad
Commission. He submits that Gaikwad Commission was
appointed under the 2005 Act at the time when the
challenge to 2014 Act was pending in the Bombay High
Court. He submits that there was no challenge to the
constitution of Gaikwad Commission before the High
Court at any stage. He submits that if 30 percent
Maratha are to be fit in 27 percent OBC reservation,
we   will   be   giving   them   a   complete    mirage.   Shri
Patwalia has taken us to the different chapters of
the   report    and   submits    that   the   Commission    has
mentioned      about    procedure,      investigations      and
evidence    collected.     He   submits    that   quantifiable
data was collected by the Commission through experts
and   three    agencies    appointed    by   the   Commission.
Experts were also engaged to marshal the data and
submit    their   opinion.     Chapter    10  of   the  report
dealt with the exceptional circumstances regarding
Marathas    justifying     exceeding    50   percent   ceiling
limit     for    reservation.      He    submits    that    the
Commission has assessed the Maratha population as 30
percent.
87. Shri Patwalia submits that the scope of judicial
review of a Commission’s report is very limited.
This    Court   shall    not   enter    into   assessment    of
evidence    to   come   to   a   different    conclusion.    He
submits    that   the   Gaikwad    Commission    report   is   a
unanimous report. After the receipt of the report,
the    Act,    2018   was    passed    unanimously     by   the
Legislative Assembly. The subjective satisfaction of
the   State   Government    to   declare   a   community  as
socially and educationally backward is not to be
easily   interfered    by   the   Courts   in   exercise  of
88. On the basis of the Commission's report, the
State Government arrived at the satisfaction that
Maratha    are  socially     and   educationally    backward
class   which   satisfaction     need   not   be  tested  in
Judicial    Review   Jurisdiction.      Formation    of  the
opinion by the State is purely a subjective process.
This Court has laid down in several judgments that
the Commission’s report needs to be treated with
deference. The High Court in the impugned judgment
has elaborately considered the Gaikwad Commission’s
report    and   the    other     material    including   the
reservation    which   was   granted    to  Other   Backward
Community in the year 1902 by Sahuji Maharaj. He
submits   that   the   High   Court    had  considered   the
effect of reports given by the earlier Commissions
in   the   impugned   judgment     and   gave   reasons  why
earlier  reports   cannot   operate   detriment  to the
89. It is submitted that method and manner of survey
is to be decided on by the Commission. No contrary
data of any expert or technical body has been placed
before this Court by the appellants to come to the
conclusion   that    the   data   considered    by  the
Commission   was    not   relevant.    The   choice  of
parameters  is   essentially   to  be   decided  by the
expert body appointed to determine the backwardness.
The statistics of population of Maratha community is
credible   and    rightly    been   accepted    by  the
90. The Commission had given a common questionnaire
to maintain uniformity for social, economical and
educational backwardness. The Commission has given
relevant parameters. The Commission had considered
the   number    of    representations     received  and
collected.   The   Commission    also   considered  the
objection for inclusion of Maratha as backward class
in Other Backward classes category and otherwise.
91. Shri   Patwalia     with    respect    to    102nd
Constitutional Amendment states that he adopts the
submissions of learned Attorney General completely.
He submits that Article 342A and mechanism which has
been brought in force only relate to the Central
list which is for the purposes of appointment in
posts under the Central Government or Educational
Institutions   under   the   control   of   the   Central
Government. Shri Patwalia further submits that the
Select Committee report relied by the High Court is
fully  admissible   for   deciphering   the   history   of
legislation and the intention of the Parliament. He
further submits that today there is no central list,
hence, there is no question of affecting the State
list. He submits that it is premature to set aside
the said action.
92. Shri Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel,
appearing   for   the    State   of   Maharashtra,     has
elaborately dealt with the judgment of this Court in
M. R. Balaji(Supra). He submits that all subsequent
judgments  providing   a   ceiling  of  50  percent    are
based on Balaji’s Case and there being several flaws
in the said judgment, the case needs to be referred
to larger Bench. He submits that 50 percent ceiling
on reservation for Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Class is a judicial legislation
which  is   impermissible.     He   further   submits   that
reservation   cannot    exceed   50   percent   is  not  the
ratio of judgment of Balaji. It is submitted that
Balaji  has   not   considered    the  effect   of  the  non
obstante  clause    contained    in   Article  15(4).   Shri
Naphade has also dealt with the judgments of this
Court in T.Devadasan(Supra), N.M. Thomas(Supra) and
93. Shri   Naphade    elaborating     his   submissions   on
Article 342A submits that the State has legislative
competence   to    prescribe    reservation    to   backward
class. He has referred to Entry 25 of List-III and
Entry  41  of   List-II.    He   submits   that   a  careful
perusal of Article 342A indicates that the scheme of
this Article is substantially different from Article
341  and  342.    The  difference     in  the  language   of
clause (2) of Article 342A as compared to clause (2)
of Article of 341 and 342 makes all the difference.
The    view    canvas    by   petitioners    that   102nd
Constitutional Amendment takes away the legislative
competence and legislative power of the States runs
counter to the basic structure of the Constitution
and the scheme of distribution of power between the
State    and   Centre.   It  is   settled   principle  of
interpretation that by construing any provision of
Act of Parliament or Constitution, the legislative
history of the relevant subject is necessary to be
seen.
94. Shri Kapil Sibal, senior advocate, appearing for
the State of Jharkhand has advanced the submissions
on   all   aspects  of   the  matters   which  are  under
consideration    in  the   present  batch  of  cases.  He
submits that how balance for Article 14, 15 and 16
shall be maintained is matter within the domain of
the executive/State legislature. No Court should fix
the   percentage   for  Article   15  and  16.  In  Indra
Sawhney’s case, there was no data for imposing a
ceiling of 50 percent. Justice Jeevan Reddy did not
rely on the Mandal Commission’s report. Mr. Sibal
submits that 50 percent was not an issue in the
Indra    Sawhney.    He   submits    that   parameters     for
Article     15(4)   and    Article    16(4)   are    entirely
different     where   Article    15   is   eligibility     and
Article    16  is  ability    to  get   a  job.  Apart    from
Balaji, all other judgments are on Article 16. He
submits     that   question     No.VI    framed    in    Indra
Sawhney’s case could not have been answered without
looking into the statistics. The concept of equality
will differ from State to State. There cannot be a
strait Jacket formula. Why stop reservation to only
50 percent when matter relates to affirmative action
by the State which is felt required by the concerned
State. Limiting access to education to 50 percent
will   cause   more   problems   than   solved.   It   is  the
State which has to look at the relevant percentage
to   be   followed   in   a  particular    case.    In   Indra
Sawhney’s case, the Court was dealing with Office
Memorandum     issued   by   Government    of   India    where
reservation      was    less    than    50    percent.     The
observation regarding 50 percent is only an Obiter.
By the judgment of this Court in N.M. Thomas, the
basis  of  Balaji    Case   that  Article   15(4)   is   an
exception  to   Article    15(1)  has   gone.   The   whole
judgment  could   not   be  relied   on  as   a  precedent
anymore. Whether a particular quota of reservation
is violative of Article 15(1) depends on facts of
each case. The State ought to be given a free hand
to pick the percentage as per need and requirement
of each State. There is no judicial power to pick a
percentage.
95. Shri   Sibal   giving    illustration    of   Kendriya
Vidyalaya  submitted    that   General   students   cannot
come  and   those   institutions    cater   only   to   the
employees of Government, Army; and the General can
only come when the seats are vacant. He submits that
the balance has to be done by the executive and not
by the Court. These are the issues which need to be
decided by a larger Bench. These issues having never
been addressed before this Court in Indra Sawhney’s
case, the matter needs to be referred to a larger
96. The     Constitution     of   India    is   a    living,
transformative     document.   The  Court   cannot   shackle
the legislature. Shri Sibal submits that 50 percent
limit for reservation prescribed in Indra Sawhney is
no   longer   a  good   law   after  103rd   Constitutional
Amendment which inserted Article 15(6) and Article
16(6)   into   the   Constitution.   Several   States   have
already provided for reservation beyond 50 percent
to Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Socially and
Educationally       Backward    class.    In    the    above
circumstances, it is necessary that these matters
may   be   referred    to   a   larger  Bench    for   fresh
adjudication.
97. Shri Sibal on Article 342A submits that under
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) the Union and the States
have   co-equal    powers   to  advance  the   interest   of
socially    and  educationally     backward   classes.   Any
exercise of power by the Union cannot encroach upon
the power of the State to identify and empower the
socially   and   educationally   backward   classes   and
determine the extent of reservation required. The
expression, “for the purposes of this Constitution”
can therefore only be construed within the contours
of power that the Union is entitled to exercise with
respect to entities, institutions, authorities and
Public   Sector   Enterprises   under   the   aegis   and
control of the Union.
98. The expression “Central List” in Article 342A(2)
relates to the notification under Article 342A(1),
wherein the Central List will include identification
of socially and educationally backward classes for
the purposes of entities, institutions, authorities
and public sector enterprises in a State, but under
the  aegis    or  control  of  the   Union.   Any   other
interpretation    would  allow   an  executive    act  to
whittle down the legislative power of the States to
provide   for  the  advancement   of  the  socially   and
educationally    backward   classes,    under   Articles
15(4), 15(5) as well as in Article 16(4), which are
an   integral   part  of  the   chapter   on   fundamental
rights.
99. Article    342A  and  Article   342A(1)   and  342A(2)
must be interpreted in the historical context and
developments both pre and post Indra Sawhney, where
the identification of the socially and educationally
backward classes in the State lists was the basis
for determining the extent of reservations. In this
regard, the use of the word “Central list” is of
significance, as opposed to Articles 341 and 342,
which only use the expression “list” in the context
of identification of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes.    This  is   because   historically,    Scheduled
Castes and Tribes were identified by the Government
of India and accepted by the States.
submits   that   he  adopts   the  submissions    made   by
learned     Attorney    General.     He    submits     that
102ndConstitutional Amendment shall not dilute the
power   of   the  State.   Article   342A   (1)   is   only
enabling provision. The Act, 2018, does not violate
101.  Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, appearing for the
respondent  submits    that  State’s   power   was  never
intended to be taken away. He submits that material
including  discussion    in  reports   of  Parliamentary
Committee are fully admissible and has to be relied
for   finding    the    intent    and   purpose    of    a
Constitutional     provision.      Dr.    Singhvi     has
elaborately   taken   us  to  the   proceedings   of  the
Select Committee and its report. Dr. Singhvi has
cited the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court
in Kalpana Mehta and others versus Union of India
and others, (2018) 7 SCC 1.He has also referred to
the Statements of objects of 123rdBill which notices
that there were State lists prior to Indra Sawhney.
The   Central    list    was    confined    to    Central
Institutions   and   Central   Government   posts.   Shri
Singhvi has also referred to 1993 Act and submits
that in the said Act Section 2(C) referred to a list
which was only a Central list. Article 342A(2) uses
the same Central list and interpretation of Article
342A(2) has to be made taking the same meaning of
Central list as was known and understood under the
regime prior to 102nd Constitutional Amendment Act.
This  Court    shall   not  annotate  the  State’s   power
under    some    interpretive    exercise.   Dr.   Singhvi
further submits that today there is no Central list
under Article 342A, there being no occupied field,
it its premature and academic.
102.     Shri   C.U.   Singh,  learned  senior   Advocate,
appearing for respondents has referred to Gaikwad
Commission’s report in detail. He has referred to
data   collected    and   reflected  in  the   report  and
submit    that    the   Commission   on   the   basis   of
quantifiable data has determined Maratha as socially
and educationally backward community. He has also
referred to Chapter 10 of the report which carves
out   exceptional     circumstances   for   exceeding   50
percent limit. Shri C.U. Singh has taken the Court
to     various      tables     and    charts     regarding
representation of Maratha Community in the Public
services, Universities and Higher Institutions. Shri
C.U. Singh submits that the representation in the
public   services   is   not   in   accordance    with  the
proportion of population of Maratha. He submits that
backwardness has to come from living standard, job.
The Commission has found that Marathas to be more in
Agriculture and in Agricultural labour. He submits
that we need to take into consideration the overall
situation.
103. Learned Counsel for the State of Bihar, State
of   Punjab,  State   of   Rajasthan,    State   of  Andhra
Pradesh, State of Tamil Nadu, State of Kerala, State
of Assam, State of Uttar Pradesh, State of Haryana
have   also   advanced    the   similar    submissions   as
advanced    by   the    State     of    Maharashtra    that
102ndConstitutional    Amendment    shall   not  take  away
power   of  the  legislative/executive       power  of  the
State   to  identify   OBC   and  to   take   measures  for
implementation of reservation. All State’s counsel
submitted that there has always been two lists i.e.
Central List and State List. It is submitted that
any other interpretation shall violate the federal
structure as envisaged in the Constitution of India.
104.  Shri  Amit   Kumar,   learned    Advocate   General,
Meghalaya, submits that in State of Meghalaya there
are about 85.9 percent tribal population. He submits
that reservation allowed in State of Meghalaya is in
accord with paragraph 810 of the Indra Sawhney’s
judgment.
105. Shri Vinay Arora, learned counsel appearing for
State of Uttarakhand, submits that State has two
lists one drawn by State and another Central list.
He adopts the arguments of learned Attorney General.
Shri  Vinay  Arora   submits   that   judgment  of   Indra
Sawhney need not to be referred to a larger Bench.
He submits that affirmative action under Articles
16(4) and 15(4) are facets of Article 14.
106.  We have also heard various counsel appearing
for  interveners.    Most   of   the    interveners   have
adopted the submissions of the State of Maharashtra.
However,  learned   counsel   Shri   A.P.Singh   and  Shri
B.B.   Biju,    appearing     for   different    interveners
submits that judgment of Indra Sawhney need not be
referred to larger Bench. They submitted that after
seventy   years,    there    has    been  upliftment.     The
reservation is affecting the merit as well as the
society.
107. We have     heard learned counsel for the parties
and perused the records.
108.  All the relevant materials which were before
the  High   Court    have   been   compiled    in  different
volumes and filed for convenience. Learned counsel
for  the   parties   during    submissions    have  referred
various    materials      including    necessary    relevant
enactments    and   reports.    From   various    volumes    a
master index containing all details of volumes has
also been prepared and submitted. Before we enter
into  submissions     of   the  learned   counsel   for   the
parties   on   six   questions    framed   by   us  and   the
impugned judgment of the High Court including points
for consideration noted in the judgment of the High
Court,  we   need  to    first   look  into   the  statutory
provisions pertaining to reservation in force at the
time when Act, 2018 was enacted.
(6)The status of Reservation at the time of
commencement of Enactment of Act, 2018
109. The     State     of   Maharashtra     has   issued    a
unified  list   of  OBC   consisting    of  118  castes   on
13.08.1967. On 10.09.1993 after the judgment of this
Court in Indra Sawhney case, the Central List of OBC
was issued by the Ministry of Welfare, Government of
India notifying the Central List of OBC consisting
of more than 200 castes. The Central List of OBC as
on date contains about 252 OBC. The Government of
Maharashtra    by    its    Government     decision    dated
07.12.1994    created      special    backward     category
containing   several     castes   and    communities.    The
Maharashtra   State   Public   Services    Reservation   for
Backward Category and other Backward Classes) Act,
2001  was   enacted     which    was   published    in   the
Maharashtra    Government      Gazette     on   22.01.2004.
Section   2(b)  defines   De-notified    Tribes.  Section
2(f) defines Nomadic Tribes. Section 2(g) defines
Other   Backward   Classes  and   Section   2(k)  defines
reservation    and    Section   2(m)    defines   Special
declared as such by the Government from
Tribes wandering from place to place in
search of their livelihood as declared by
2(g) "Other Backward Classes" means
any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens as declared by the
Government and includes Other Backward
Classes declared by the Government of
reservation of post in the services for
the members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Category and Other Backward Classes;
2(m) "Special Backward Category" means
socially     and    educationally      backward
classes of citizens declared as a Special
Backward Category by the Government.”
110. Section     4   provides      for     reservation      and
percentage. Section 4(2) is as follows:
Section 4(2) Subject to other provisions
of this Act, there shall be posts reserved for
the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
Category and Other Backward Classes, at the
stage of direct recruitment in public services
and posts specified under clause (j) of
Description of    Caste/Tribe/           Percentage of
Category/Class                   vacancies reservation
(1) Scheduled Castes             . .     13 per cent.
(2) Scheduled Tribes             . .      7 per cent.
(3) De-notified Tribes (A)        . .     3 per cent.
(4) Nomadic Tribes (B)            . .   2.5 per cent.
(5) Nomadic Tribes (C)            . .   3.5 per cent.
(6) Nomadic Tribes (D)           . .      2 per cent.
(7) Special Backward Category     . .     2 per cent.
(8) Other Backward Classes         . .   19 per cent.
Total     . .   52 per cent.
111. The Maharashtra State Commission for Backward
Classes    Act,    2005   was    enacted     by    the   State
Legislature   providing    for  constitution    of   State
level Commission for Backward Classes other than the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and to provide
for   matters    connected   therewith    or   incidental
thereto. Section 2(e) defined the Lists in following
“Section 2(e) “Lists” means the Lists
prepared by the State Government, from
time to time, for the purposes of making
appointments or posts, in favour of the
backward classes of citizens who, in the
opinion of the State Government, are not
adequately represented in the services
under the State Government and any local
or other authority within the State or
112. Section 9 of the Act deals with functions of the
Commission in the following words:
“Section 9.(1) It shall be the function of
requests for inclusion of any class of
inclusion or under-inclusion of any
Government as it deems appropriate;
Government regarding the criteria and
conducted on a regular basis through
building of data about the changing
perform such other functions as may be
prescribed.
recommendations made by the Commission
under this section shall ordinarily be
binding on the State Government and
reasons in writing, if, it totally or
recommendations or modifies it.”
113.   Another Enactment, namely, Maharashtra Private
of   seats   for  admission     for   Scheduled   Castes,
Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes)Act, 2006
was   enacted    which   was   published    in    Maharashtra
Gazette   on   01.08.2006.    Section   2  defines     various
expressions     including    Nomadic    Tribes     and   Other
Backward Classes in other words. Section 4 provided
that in every Aided Private Professional Educational
Institution, seats equal to 50% shall be reserved
for candidates belonging to the Reserved Category.
“Section 4. (1) In every Aided Private
Professional Educational Institution, seats
equal to fifty per cent. of the Sanctioned
Intake of each Professional Course shall be
reserved for candidates belonging to the
(2)    The    seats    reserved     for     candidates
belonging to the Reserved Category under sub-
section (1) shall be filled in by admitting
candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
Jatis), Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward
Classes,     respectively,     in    the    proportion
Description of Caste/Tribe/             Percentage of
Category/Class of Reserved                reservation
(1) Scheduled Castes and Scheduled                 13%
114.     As noted above, at the time of enactments of
above 2001 and 2006 Acts,           list containing Other
Backward Classes had been existing which was issued
by the State Government from time to time. By GR
dated 26.09.2008, the State of Maharashtra extended
the   list  of   OBC  to   include   346  castes.  We   have
already     noticed     that    the    Maharashtra     State
Reservation (of seats for admission in educational
institutions in the State and for appointments or
posts in the public services under the State) for
Educationally and Socially Backward Category (ESBC)
Act, 2014 was enacted by the State Legislature which
received the assent of the Governor on 09.01.2015.
In the said Act Maratha community was declared as
Educationally and Socially Backward Category (ESBC).
The implementation of the Act was stayed by the High
Court by its order dated 07.04.2015 passed in Writ
Petition   No.3151    of    2014   which    continued     in
operation till the writ petition was dismissed as
infructuous by the impugned judgment. From the Acts
2001 and 2006 as noted above, it is clear that the
percentage    of   reservation      in    the    State    of
Maharashtra    in Public    Services    was   52%    whereas
percentage of reservation of seats for admission for
SC and ST, De-notified Tribes and Nomadic Tribes and
Other   Backward   Classes    in   Private     Professional
Educational   Institutions    was  50%   at   the   time  of
enactment of Act, 2018. We may also notice certain
relevant   provisions    of   Act   LXII   of    2018.   The
“An Act to provide for reservation of
seats    for   admission      in    educational
reservation of posts for appointments in
public services and posts under the State,
to Socially and Educationally Backward
Classes of Citizens (SEBC) in the State of
Maharashtra for their advancement and for
matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for
reservation of seats for admission in
educational institutions in the State and
for reservation of posts for appointments
in public services and posts under the
State   to    Socially    and    Educationally
Backward Classes of Citizens (SEBC) in the
State of Maharashtra for their advancement
and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto ; it is hereby enacted
in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of
115.   Section  2(1)(j)   provides    that  Socially  and
Educationally   Backward   Classes   of  Citizens  (SEBC)
includes the Maratha community. Section 2(1)(j) is
“2(1)(j)    “Socially     and    Educationally
Backward   Classes    of    Citizens   (SEBC)”
includes the Maratha Community declared to
be Educationally and Socially Backward
Category    (ESBC)in     pursuance    of    the
Maharashtra State Reservation (of seats
for admission in educational institutions
in the State and for appointments or posts
in the public services under the State)
for Educationally and Socially Backward
116. Section 3 provides for applicability to all the
direct   recruitments,   appointments    made  in  public
services and posts in the State which is as follows:
“3. (1) This Act shall apply to all the
direct recruitments, appointments made in
public services and posts in the State
Medical,      Technical    and   Educational
(b) the posts to be filled by transfer
(c) the temporary appointments of less
than forty-five days duration ; and
(isolated) in any cadre or grade.
admission     in    educational     institutions
institutions, whether aided or un-aided by
educational institutions referred to in
Constitution of India.
(3) The State Government shall, while
entering into or renewing an agreement
with any educational institution or any
establishment for the grant of any aid as
provided in the explanation to clauses (d)
and   (e)    of    section    2,   respectively,
incorporate a condition for compliance
with the provisions of this Act, by such
educational institution or establishment.
(4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby
declared that nothing in this Act shall
affect the reservation provided to the
(Reservation       for     Scheduled     Castes,
Backward   Category     and   Other   Backward
Classes) Act, 2001 and the Maharashtra
Institutions (Reservation of seats for
admission for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Jatis), Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward
117.    Section 4 deals with seats for admission in
educational institutions and appointments in public
services and posts under the State or SEBC. Section
contained in any judgment, decree or order
of any Court or other authority, and
subject to the other provisions of this
seats   in    educational    institutions
institutions, whether aided or un-
minority     educational     institutions
referred to in clause (1) of article
30 of the Constitution of India ; and
appointments in direct recruitment in
public services and posts under the
State, shall be separately reserved
for the Socially and Educationally
Backward Classes (SEBC) including the
reservation shall not be applicable to
Scheduled Tribes candidates in the
Scheduled Areas of the State under the
Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of
India as per the notification issued
on the 9th June 2014 in this behalf.
shall be applicable for the purposes of
under this Act and reservation under this
Act shall be available only to those
persons who are below Creamy Layer.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
sub-section, the expression “Creamy Layer”
means the person falling in the category
Government in the Social Justice and
Special Assistance Department, by general
or special orders issued in this behalf,
from time to time.”
118.    We  have  already  noticed  that  in   the writ
petitions filed before the High Court, Act, 2018 was
challenged   being  invalid   and   violative   of  the
provisions of the Constitution of India.
(7)Consideration of 10 Grounds urged for revisiting
and referring the judgment of Indra Sawhney to
a larger Bench.
119. Shri Mukul Rohtagi as well as Shri Kapil Sibal,
learned senior counsel have submitted that judgment
of Indra Sawhney needs to be revisited and refer to
a larger Bench of eleven Judges.
120. We shall proceed to consider the grounds given
by Shri Mukul Rohtagi in seriatim which shall also
cover the grounds raised by Shri Sibal.
121. First ground of Shri Rohatgi is that it is only
three Judges, Justice T.K. Thommen, Justice Kuldip
Singh   and Justice   R.M.  Sahai   who  held   that  50%
reservation   cannot  be  breached   whereas   other  six
Judges have held that 50% can be breached, hence,
majority opinion in Indra Sawhney does not hold that
50%   is  the  ceiling   limit  for   reservation.    For
considering the above submission we need to notice
the opinion expressed in each of the six judgments
delivered in Indra Sawhney's case.
122.   Before   we  proceed  to   notice   the   relevant
paragraphs of the judgment of Indra Sawhney, we need
to first notice method of culling out the majority
opinion expressed in a judgment where more than one
judgments    have   been    delivered.    The   Constitution
Bench of this Court in Rajnarain Singh vs. Chairman,
Patna Administration Committee, Patna and another,
AIR  1954   SC   569,   had   occasion   to   find  out   the
majority   opinion    of  a   seven-Judge    Bench  judgment
delivered by this Court in Re Delhi Laws Act, 1912,
Ajmer-Merwara (Extension of Laws)Act, 1947 vs. Part
Constitution    Bench    laid   down  that    opinion   which
embodies    the   greatest     common    measures    of   the
agreement   among   the   Bench   is  to   be  accepted   the
decision of the Court. Thus, for culling out the
decision of the Court in a case where there are
several opinions, on which there is greatest common
measure of agreement is the decision of the Court.
123.   We now revert back to the judgment of Indra
Sawhney  to   find   out   what   is the    greatest  common
measures of the agreement between the Judges with
regard  to   the   reservation    to  the   extent  of   50%.
Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy for himself, M.H. Kania,
CJ,   M.N.Venkatachaliah,   A.M.   Ahmadi,   JJ.,   has
elaborately dealt with the extent of the reservation
under Article 16(4). In paragraph 809 conclusion was
recorded by the Court that reservations contemplated
under   Article  16(4)  should   not  exceed  50%.   In
paragraph 810 it was observed that in certain extra-
ordinary   circumstances,  some   relaxation  in   this
strict rule of 50% may become imperative. Paragraphs
809 and 810 are to following effect:
“809. From the above discussion, the
irresistible conclusion that follows is
that the reservations contemplated in
clause (4) of Article 16 should not exceed
810. While 50% shall be the rule, it is
necessary not to put out of consideration
certain extraordinary situations inherent
in the great diversity of this country and
the people. It might happen that in far
flung and remote areas the population
inhabiting those areas might, on account
of their being out of the mainstream of
national life and in view of conditions
peculiar to and characteristical to them,
need to be treated in a different way,
some relaxation in this strict rule may
become imperative. In doing so, extreme
caution is to be exercised and a special
case made out.”
124.    Justice S. Ratnavel Pandian while delivering a
separate    judgment  has   expressed   his   disagreement
with the proposition of fixing the reservation for
socially and educationally backward classes at 50%
as a maximum limit. In paragraph 243(9) following
"243(9) No maximum ceiling of reservation
can be fixed under Article 16(4) of the
appointments or posts in favour of any
services under the State”. The decisions
fixing the percentage of reservation only
unsustainable.”
125.   Justice   Thommen,    Justice   Kuldip   Singh  and
Justice R.M. Sahai took the view that reservation in
all cases should remain below 50% of total number of
seats. Paragraph 323(8) of Justice Thommen's opinion
"323(8) Reservation in all cases must be
confined to a minority of available posts
or seats so as not to unduly sacrifice
merits. The number of seats or posts
reserved under Article 15 or Article 16
must at all times remain well below 50% of
the total number of seats or posts.”
126.    Justice Kuldip Singh also in paragraph 384(i)
expressed his opinion in accord with Justice R.M.
"384(i)     that    the   reservations       under
Article 16(4) must remain below 50% and
under no circumstance be permitted to go
beyond 50%. Any reservation beyond 50% is
constitutionally invalid.”
127.   Justice R.M. Sahai in paragraph 619(i) held
that   reservation    should   in   no   case   exceed    50%.
Justice    T.K.   Thommen,   Justice     Kuldip    Singh   and
Justice R.M. Sahai delivered dissenting opinion.
128.   Now,   we  come   to  the   judgment    delivered    by
Justice     P.B.   Sawant    who    delivered      concurring
opinion. Two paragraphs of the judgment of Justice
Sawant   are   relevant   to  notice.     In  paragraph    518
justice   Sawant    observed   that    there   is   no   legal
infirmity     in    keeping    the    reservations       under
clause(4) alone or under clause (4) and clause (1)
of   Article   16   together,   exceeding     50%.   However,
validity of the extent of excess of reservations
over    50%    would    depend    upon     the    facts    and
circumstances of each case. In the same paragraph
Justice   Sawant,  however, observed   that  it  would
ordinarily be wise and nothing much would be lost,
if the intentions of the Framers of the Constitution
and the observations of Dr. Ambedkar, on the subject
be kept in mind. Justice Sawant obviously referred
to speech of Dr. Ambedkar dated 30.11.1948 where Dr.
Ambedkar has categorically stated that reservation
under Article 16(4) shall be confined to minority of
seats. However, in paragraph 552 justice Sawant has
recorded his answers   and in answer to Question No.4
Ordinarily, the reservations kept both
under Article 16(1) and 16(4) together
appointments in a grade, cadre or service
in any particular year. It is only for
extraordinary reasons that this percentage
may be exceeded. However, every excess
over 50 per cent will have to be justified
on valid grounds which grounds will have
to be specifically made out.”
129.   The   above  opinion  of   Justice   Sawant  is
completely in accord with the opinion expressed by
Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy in paragraphs 809 and 810.
The opinion of Justice Sawant expressed in the above
paragraph is that ordinarily, the reservations under
Article 16(1) and 16(4) should not exceed 50%        and
it is only in       extra-ordinary circumstances that
this percentage may be exceeded       which is also the
opinion   expressed   by  Justice   B.P.  Jeevan  Reddy.
Applying the principle of Constitution Bench of this
Court   in   Rajnarain   Singh   (supra),   the  opinion
embodies the greatest common measure of agreement
between the opinions expressed. Thus, the majority
opinion,   the ratio of judgment of Indra Sawhney as
expressed by the majority is one which is expressed
in paragraphs 809 and 810 of the judgment of Justice
B.P.  Jeevan   Reddy.   The  submission  of  Shri  Mukul
Rohtagi cannot be accepted that majority opinion of
Indra  Sawhney   is  that   50%  can  be  breached.  The
majority opinion as noted above is that normally
reservation should not exceed 50% and it is only in
extra-ordinary circumstances it can exceed 50%. What
can be the extra-ordinary circumstances have been
indicated in paragraph 810.
130. Alternatively if we again look to the opinion
(a) Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy (for himself
paragraph 809 that the reservation
contemplated in clause (4) of Article
16 should not exceed 50%.
and Justice Sahai in their separate
opinion held that reservation under
Article 16(4) should not exceed 50%.
131.   Thus greatest common measure of agreement in
six separate judgments delivered in Indra Sawhney is
(i)    Reservation   under   Article    16(4)
should not exceed 50%.
(ii)   For exceeding reservation beyond 50%
caution is to be exercised.
132.       The above is the ratio of Indra Sawhney
judgment.
133.   We,  thus,  do  not  find  any  good   ground  to
revisit Indra Sawhney or to refer the same to a
larger Bench on the above ground urged.
134. Now, we come to the second ground pressed by
Shri Rohtagi is that different Judges from 1993 till
date have spoken in different voices with regard to
reservation under Article 15(4) and 16(4) which is a
good   ground  to  refer  Indra  Sawhney   to  a  larger
135. We may notice the Constitution Bench judgment of
this Court in M.R. Balaji and others vs. State of
Mysore    and others, AIR 1963 SC 649, in which this
Court while considering Article 15(4) had laid down
that   reservation  under  Article   15(4)   ordinarily,
speaking generally and in a broad manner special
provision should be less than 50%, how much less
than    50%   would   depend    upon   the    prevailing
circumstances in each case. The Constitution Bench
in the above case was considering the challenge to
order passed by the State of Mysore that 68% of the
seats available for admission to the Engineering and
Medical Colleges and to other technical institutions
were reserved and only 32% remain available to the
merit pool. The question about the extent of the
special provision which would be competent to State
to make under Article 15(4) was also examined by the
Constitution Bench. The Constitution Bench speaking
through    Justice   P.B.    Gajendra    Gadkar   stated
“34..........A       special         provision
contemplated    by   Article     15(4)    like
reservation of posts and appointments
contemplated by Article 16(4) must be
within reasonable limits. The interests of
weaker sections of society which are a
first charge on the States and the Centre
have to be adjusted with the interests of
the community as a whole. The adjustment
of these competing claims is undoubtedly a
difficult matter, but if under the guise
of making a special provision, State
reserves    practically    all    the    seats
available   in   all  the    colleges,    that
clearly would be subverting the object of
Article 15(4). In this matter again, we
are reluctant to say definitely what would
be a proper provision to make. Speaking
generally and in a broad way, a special
provision should be less than 50%; how
much less than 50% would depend upon the
present prevailing circumstances in each
case.”
136.   The Constitution Bench also after noticing the
judgment of this Court in       General Manager, Southern
Railway vs. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36, observed
that what is true in regard to Article 15(4) is
equally    true     in    Article      16(4).    Following
observations were made in paragraph 37:
“37. ….Therefore, what is true in regard
to Article 15(4) is equally true in regard to
Article 16(4). There can be no doubt that the
Constitution-makers assumed, as they were
entitled   to,    that    while   making   adequate
reservation under Article 16(4), care would be
taken   not   to    provide     for   unreasonable,
excessive or extravagant reservation, for that
would, by eliminating general competition in a
large   field   and    by    creating   wide-spread
dissatisfaction      amongst      the    employees,
materially affect efficiency. Therefore, like
the special provision improperly made under
Article 15(4), reservation made under Article
16(4) beyond the permissible and legitimate
limits would be liable to be challenged as a
fraud on the Constitution. …”
137.   The reservation ought to be less than 50% was
spoken in the above Constitution Bench judgment.
138. The next Constitution Bench judgment which noted
the judgment in M.R. Balaji (supra) and applied the
percentage of 50% on the carry forward rule is T.
Devadasan. The first judgment in which a discordant
note with regard to 50% limit of reservation was
expressed is the judgment of this Court in State of
Kerala and another vs. N.M. Thomas and others, 1976
(2)  SCC  310,   In  the above   case   the  Constitution
Bench had occasion to examine Rule 13-AA of         Kerala
State  and   Subordinate   Services   Rules,   1958  which
empower the State to grant exemption for a specific
period   to   any   member   or   member    belonging   to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes from passing
the test referred to in Rule 13 and Rule 13-A. The
State of Kerala granted exemption to member of SC
and  ST   from   passing  of  the   test,   N.M.   Thomas,
respondent had filed writ petition in the High Court
asking   for   declaration   that   the   Rule   13-AA  as
unconstitutional.    The grievance    of  the   respondent
was that by virtue of exemption granted to members
of the SC they have been promoted earlier than the
respondent, although they had not passed the test.
The High Court allowed the writ petition against
which judgment the State of Kerala had come up in
appeal. The appeal was allowed and Rule 13-AA was
held to be valid. The Constitution Bench judgment of
the Court was delivered by Chief Justice, A.N. Ray
with whom Justice K.K. Mathew, Justice M.H. Beg,
Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer and Justice S. Murtaza
Fazal Ali concurred by delivering separate opinions.
Two Judges, namely, Justice H.R. Khanna and Justice
A.C. Gupta delivered dissenting opinion. With regard
to extent of reservation upto 50% only two Judges,
namely, Justice Fazal Ali and Justice Krishna Iyer
has expressed the opinion. Justice Beg noticed the
Constitution Bench judgments of this Court in M.R.
Balaji and T.Devadasan, which had held that more
than  50%  reservation   for  backward  class  would
violate the principle of reasonableness. No opinion
of his own was expressed by Justice Beg. Justice
Fazal Ali also in his judgment had noted 50% ceiling
of reservation but observed that the above is only
rule of caution and does not exhaust all categories.
In paragraph 191 Justice Fazal Ali considered the
question and following was laid down:
“191. This means that the reservation
should be within the permissible limits
and should not be a cloak to fill all the
posts belonging to a particular class of
citizens and thus violate Article 16(1) of
the Constitution indirectly. At the same
time clause (4) of Article 16 does not fix
any limit on the power of the Government
to make reservation. Since clause (4) is a
part of Article 16 of the Constitution it
is manifest that the State cannot be
reservation so as to defeat the policy
contained in Article 16(1). As to what
would be a suitable reservation within
permissible limits will depend upon the
facts and circumstances of each case and
no hard and fast rule can be laid down,
mathematical formula so as to be adhered
to in all cases. Decided cases of this
Court have no doubt laid down that the
percentage    of   reservation     should   not
authorities, this is, however, a rule of
categories. Suppose for instance a State
has a large number of backward classes of
citizens which constitute 80 per cent of
the population and the Government, in
order to give them proper representation,
reserves 80 per cent of the jobs for them,
can it be said that the percentage of
reservation    is   bad   and    violates   the
permissible    limits   of    clause   (4)   of
Article 16? The answer must necessarily be
in the negative. The dominant object of
this provision is to take steps to make
inadequate representation adequate.”
139. Justice Krishna Iyer in paragraph 143 of the
judgment expressed his concurrence with the opinion
of Justice Fazal Ali that arithmetical limit of 50%
in any one year set by some earlier rulings cannot
perhaps be pressed too far. Following observations
“143. ... I agree with my learned Brother
arithmetical limit of 50 per cent in any
one year set by some earlier rulings
cannot perhaps be pressed too far. Overall
representation in a department does not
depend on recruitment in a particular
year, but the total strength of a cadre. I
agree with his construction of Article
forward” rule.
140.    With regard to 50% reservation limit, above
are only observations made by two Hon'ble Judges in
seven-Judge   Constitution  Bench.   It  is  true  that
Justice Fazal Ali expressed his discordant note with
the ceiling of 50% but the observations as noted
above   were  not  the  decision  of   the  seven-Judge
Constitution Bench judgment.
141. In T. Devadasn vs. Union of India and another,
AIR 1964 SC 179, a Constitution Bench of this Court
had occasion   to examine the carry forward rule in a
recruitment under the Union of India. This Court had
noticed M.R. Balaji and held that what was laid down
in   M.R.  Balaji   would  apply in  the   above  case.
Referring to M.R. Balaji following was laid down in
paragraph 16 to the following effect:
“16. The startling effect of the carry
forward rule as modified in 1955 would be
apparent if in the illustration which we
have taken there were in the third year 50
total vacancies instead of 100. Out of
these 50 vacancies 9 would be reserved for
the Scheduled Castes and Tribes, adding to
that, the 36 carried forward from the two
previous years, we would have a total of
45 reserved vacancies out of 50, that is,
a percentage of 90. In the case before us
45 vacancies have actually been filled out
of which 29 have gone to members of the
Scheduled Castes and Tribes on the basis
of reservation permitted by the carry
forward rule. This comes to about 64.4% of
reservation. Such being the result of the
operation of the carry forward rule we
in Balaji case [AIR 1963 SC 649] hold that
the rule is bad. Indeed, even in General
Manager      Southern         Railway     v.
Rangachari [(1962) 2 SCR 586] which is a
case in which reservation of vacancies to
be filled by promotion was upheld by this
Court, Gajendragadkar, J., who delivered
reservation which can be made under
Article 16(4) is intended merely to
backward communities. It cannot be
used for creating monopolies or for
unduly or illegitimately disturbing
employees. In exercising the powers
fairly and objectively considered and
strike a reasonable balance between
the claims of backward classes and the
claims of other employees as well as
the important consideration of the
efficiency of administration;….”
It is clear from both these decisions
that   the   problem   of   giving   adequate
representation to members of backward
classes enjoined by Article 16(4) of the
Constitution is not to be tackled by
framing a general rule without bearing in
mind its repercussions from year to year.
What precise method should be adopted for
Government to consider. It is enough for
us to say that while any method can be
evolved by the Government it must strike
“a reasonable balance between the claims
of the backward classes and claims of
other employees” as pointed out in Balaji
case [AIR 1963 SC 649].”
142.   In   the    above  case    Justice  Subba  Rao has
expressed     dissenting    opinion.   Justice  Subba Rao
observed that what was held in M.R. Balaji cannot be
applied in the case of reservation of appointment in
the matter of recruitment. Following observation was
made by Justice Subba Rao in paragraph 30:
“30. In the instant case, the State made
a provision; adopting the principle of
“carry forward”. Instead of fixing a
higher percentage in the second and third
selections based upon the earlier results,
it directed that the vacancies reserved in
one selection for the said Castes and
filled up by other candidates, should be
added to the quota fixed for the said
Castes and Tribes in the next selection
and likewise in the succeeding selection.
As the posts reserved in the first year
for the said Castes and Tribes were filled
Scheduled Tribe applicants, the result was
that in the next selection the posts
proportionately reduced. This provision
individuals who applied for the second or
the third selection, as the case may be,
though the non-Scheduled Castes and non-
Scheduled Tribes, taken as one unit, were
benefited in the earlier selection or
selections. This injustice to individuals,
reservation cannot, in my view, make the
provision for reservation nonetheless a
provision for reservation.”
(Railway)    Represented    by   its   Assistant    General
Secretary on behalf of the Association vs. Union of
India   and  others,   (1981)   1  SCC   246,   Justice  O.
Chinnappa   Reddy   observed   that  there    is  no  fixed
ceiling to reservation or preferential treatment to
the  Scheduled    Castes  and   Scheduled   Tribes   though
generally reservation may not be far in excess of
50%. Following words were spoken in paragraph 135:
reservation or preferential treatment in
Scheduled      Tribes     though      generally
reservation may not be far in excess of
fifty per cent. There is no rigidity about
the fifty per cent rule which is only a
convenient guideline laid down by Judges.
144.   In K.C. Vasanth Kumar and another vs. State of
after noticing the Balaji observed that percentage
of reservations is not a matter upon which a court
may pronounce with no material at hand. Following
observations were made by Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy
“57. The Balaji [M.R. Balaji v. State of
considered the question of the extent of
the special provision which the State
would be competent to make under Article
We should think that that is a matter for
experts in management and administration.
There might be posts or technical courses
for which only the best can be admitted
and others might be posts and technical
courses for which a minimum qualification
would   also  serve.   The   percentage   of
reservations is not a matter upon which a
court may pronounce with no material at
hand. For a court to say that reservations
should not exceed 40 per cent 50 per cent
or 60 per cent, would be arbitrary and the
Constitution does not permit us to be
arbitrary. Though in the Balaji case [M.R.
Balaji v. State of Mysore, AIR 1963 SC 649
thought that generally and in a broad way
a special provision should be less than 50
per cent, and how much less than 50 per
cent   would  depend   upon   the   relevant
prevailing circumstances in each case, the
Court confessed: “In this matter again, we
are reluctant to say definitely what would
be a proper provision to make.” All that
the Court would finally say was that in
the circumstances of the case before them,
inconsistent with Article 15(4) of the
Constitution. We are not prepared to
read Balaji [M.R.    Balaji v. State        of
SCR 439] as arbitrarily laying down 50 per
cent as the outer limit of reservation. ……
(emphasis supplied)”
145.   In the same judgment of K.C. Vasanth, Justice
E.S. Venkataramiah has expressed a contrary opinion
to one which was expressed by Justice O. Chinnappa
Reddy in paragraph 149. Justice Venkataramiah held
that 50% rule has not been unsettled by the majority
in N.M. Thomas. In paragraph 149 following was laid
"149. After carefully going through all
the seven opinions in the above case, it
is difficult to hold that the settled view
of this Court that the reservation under
Article 15(4) or Article 16(4) could not
be more than 50% has been unsettled by a
majority on the Bench which decided this
case.”
146. The reference of Judges, who spoke in different
voices   are  the judgments   as  noted   above.   It is
relevant to notice that neither in N.M. Thomas nor
in K C Basant case the decision of the Court was to
disapprove 50% ceiling as fixed by M.R. Balaji. It
is although true that Justice Fazal Ali, Justice
O.Chinnappa    Reddy   and  Justice   Krishna  Iyer   have
expressed their doubt about the advisability of 50%
rule. Another judgment which has been referred to is
the judgment of this Court in State of Punjab and
Hira    Lal  and    others,   1970(3)   SCC   567,   where
K.S.Hegde, J. speaking for a three-Judge Bench had
observed that the question of reservation to be made
is   primarily    matter   for   the  State   to   decide.
However, no observation was made by Justice Hegde in
the above case regarding M.R. Balaji case.
147.   The judgment of this Court in        N.M. Thomas,
Akhil Bharatiya Karamchari Sangh and State of Punjab
and even dissenting judgment of Justice Krishna Iyer
in   Devadasan   and  Akhil  Bharatiya   Kaamchari   Sangh
have been referred to and considered by nine-Judge
Constitution Bench of this Court in Indra Sawhney.
In Indra Sawhney, Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy while
considering   the   question   No.6  noted  M.R.   Balaji,
Devadasan,    N.M.     Thomas      and    concluded     that
reservation contemplated in clause (4) of Article 16
should not exceed 50%. After considering all the
above  cases   which   according    to   Shri  Rohtagi   are
discordant notes, a larger nine-Judge Constitution
Bench having held that the reservation contemplated
in clause (4) of Article 16 should not exceed 50% of
earlier doubt raised by the Judges as noted above
cannot be relied any further. The larger Bench in
Indra Sawhney has settled the law after considering
all  earlier   decisions    of   this   Court   as  well  as
reliance of opinion of few Judges as noted and as
relied by Shri Rohtagi is of no avail and cannot
furnish   any   ground   to   refer    judgment    of  Indra
Sawhney to a larger Bench.
148.     One  more   judgment     delivered    after   Indra
Sawhney has been relied by Shri Rohtagi that is S.V.
Joshi and others vs. State of Karnataka and others,
(2012)  7  SCC   41.  Shri   Rohtagi    submits   that  this
Court  in  S.V.   Joshi   in   paragraph   4  referring   to
M.Nagaraj vs. Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 212, held
if a State wants to exceed 50% reservation, then it
is required to base its decision on the quantifiable
data. In paragraph 4 following was laid down:
above writ petitions, Articles 15 and 16
of the Constitution have been amended vide
the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment)
Act, 2005, and the Constitution (Eighty-
first Amendment) Act, 2000, respectively,
subject-matter of subsequent decisions of
India (2006) 8 SCC 212,       and Ashoka Kumar
Thakur v. Union of India [(2008) 6 SCC 1]
in which, inter alia, it has been laid
down that if a State wants to exceed fifty
per cent reservation, then it is required
to base its decision on the quantifiable
data. In the present case, this exercise
has not been done.”
149.    The observation was made in paragraph 4, as
noted   above,   that   the   Constitution   Bench   in M.
Nagaraj   has  laid   down   that  if  a  State  wants  to
exceed 50% reservation, then it is required to base
its decision on a quantifiable data, which is clear
misreading of judgment of the Constitution Bench in
M. Nagaraj. In M. Nagaraj, the Constitution Bench
has not laid down any proposition to the effect that
if a State wants to exceed 50% reservation, then it
is required to base its decision on the quantifiable
data. To the contrary the Constitution Bench of this
Court in M. Nagaraj has reiterated the numerical
bench mark like 50% rule in Indra Sawhney's case.
Following observation was made by the Constitution
“120......In   addition     to   the   above
evolved numerical benchmarks like ceiling
limit of 50% based on post-specific roster
coupled with the concept of replacement to
provide immunity against the charge of
discrimination.
122. We reiterate that the ceiling limit
of 50%, the concept of creamy layer and
backwardness, inadequacy of representation
and overall administrative efficiency are
all constitutional requirements without
opportunity in Article 16 would collapse.”
150.   The Constitution Bench judgment of this Court
in Ashok Kumar Thakur has also not laid down any
proposition which has been referred in paragraph 4
of S.V. Joshi. This Court's judgment of three-Judge
Bench   in   S.V.   Joshi   case   does    not  support    the
contention of Shri Rohtagi.
151. In view of the foregoing discussion, we do not
find   any  substance    in  the   second    ground   of  Shri
Rohtagi that     this Court's judgment of Indra Sawhney
to be referred to a larger Bench.
152.      The  judgment     of   Indra   Sawhney    has   been
followed    by   this   Court    in   a   number    of   cases
including     at    least     in    the     following     four
(1) Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education &
Research, Chandigarh and others vs. Faculty
(2) M. Nagaraj and others vs. Union of India and
(3) Krishna Murthy (Dr.) and others vs. Union of
Which     judgment       though     was     considering
reservation    under   Article    243D   and   243T   has
applied 50% ceiling as laid down in Balaji.
(4) The Constitution Bench judgment of this Court
in Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao & Ors. vs. State of
A.P. & Ors., 2020(7) Scale 162, reiterated the
principle as referred and reiterated that outer
limit is 50% as specified in Indra Sawhney's case.
153.    We move to ground Nos.3 and 4 as formulated by
Shri Mukul Rohtagi to make a reference to the larger
154. The   Constitution,   the  paramount   law  of   the
country has given to the Indian citizens the basic
freedom and equality which are meant to be lasting
and   permanent.   The  Constitution  of   India  is  the
vehicle by which the goals set out in it are to be
achieved. The right from primitive society upto the
organised nations the most cherished right which all
human beings sought was the right to equality. The
Preamble    of   our   Constitution   reflects   a   deep
deliberations and precision in choosing ideal and
aspirations of people which shall guide all those
who    have   to   govern.   Equality   of   status   and
opportunity is one of the noble objectives of the
framers    of   the   Constitution.   The   doctrine   of
equality before law is part of rule of law which
pervades   the   Indian    Constitution.   Justice    Y.V.
Chandrachud   in  Smt.  Indira   Nehru   Gandhi   vs.  Raj
Narain, (1975) Supp.SCC 1 has referred to equality
of status and opportunity as forming part of the
basic structure of the Constitution. In paragraph
“664.I consider it beyond the pale of
reasonable controversy that if there be
Constitution on the score that they form a
Constitution, they are that: (i) Indian
sovereign    democratic      republic;     (ii)
Equality of status and opportunity shall
be secured to all its citizens; (iii) The
State shall have no religion of its own
and all persons shall be equally entitled
to freedom of conscience and the right
freely to profess, practise and propagate
religion and that (iv) the nation oil all
be governed by a Government of laws, not
of men. These, in my opinion, are the
pillars of our constitutional philosophy,
the pillars, therefore, of the basic
structure of the Constitution.”
155.   Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution which
are facets of right of equality were incorporated as
fundamental   rights   to   translate   the   ideals   and
objectives   of    the    Constitution    and    to   give
opportunities to the backward class of the society
so as to enable them to catch up those who are ahead
of   them.  Article  15(1)  and Article  16(1)  of  the
Constitution are the provisions engrafted to realise
substantive equality where Articles 15(4) and 16(4)
are   to  realise  the  protective equality.   Articles
15(1) and 16(1) are the fundamental rights of the
citizens whereas Articles 15(4) and 16(4) are the
obligations of the States. Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy
in Indra Sawhney in paragraph 641 has said that the
equality has been single greatest craving of all
human beings at all points of time. For finding out
the objectives and the intention of the framers of
the Constitution we need to refer to Constituent
Assembly debates on draft Article 10 (Article 16 of
the Constitution) held on 30.11.1948 (Book 2 Volume
No,VII), Dr. Ambedkar's reply on draft Article 10
has been referred to and quoted in all six judgments
delivered    in  Indra  Sahwney  case.  What   was  the
objective of Article 10, 10(1) and 10(3) has been
explained by Dr. Ambedkar which speech has been time
and again referred to remind us the objective of the
above fundamental right.
156.     Dr. Ambedkar referred to Article 10(1) as a
generic principle. Dr. Ambedkar observed that if the
reservation is to be consistent on the sub-clause
(1) of Article 10 it must confine to the reservation
of   minority    of seats.   Following   are  the  part of
speech    of   Dr.  B.R.   Ambedkar  in   the  Constituent
these facts in mind--the three principles,
we had to reconcile,--they will see that
no better formula could be produced than
the one that is embodied in sub-clause (3)
of article 10 of the Constitution; they
believe and hold that there shall be
equality of opportunity, has been embodied
in sub-clause (1) of Article 10. It is a
generic principle. At the same time, as I
said, we had to reconcile this formula
communities that the administration which
has    now--for    historical    reasons--been
controlled by one community or a few
communities,     that      situation     should
disappear and that the others also must
have an opportunity of getting into the
public services. Supposing, for instance,
we were to concede in full the demand of
those communities who have not been so far
employed in the public services to the
fullest extent, what would really happen
is, we shall be completely destroying the
first proposition upon which we are all
agreed, namely, that there shall be an
equality of opportunity. Let me give an
illustration.   Supposing,   for  instance,
reservations were made for a community or
a collection of communities, the total of
which came to something like 70 per cent.
of the total posts under the State and
only 30 per cent. are retained as the
unreserved. Could anybody say that the
reservation of 30 per cent. as open to
general competition would be satisfactory
from the point of view of giving effect to
the first principle, namely, that there
shall be equality of opportunity? It
cannot be in my judgment. Therefore the
seats to be reserved, if the reservation
is to be consistent with sub-clause (1) of
Article 10, must be confined to a minority
of seats. It is then only that the first
principle could find its place in the
Constitution and effective in operation.”
157.   The above views of Dr. Ambedkar expressed in
the  Constituent   Assembly for  balancing  the  draft
Articles 10(1) and 10(3) equivalent to Articles 16
and 16(4) have been referred to and relied by this
Court in Indra Sawhney as well as in other cases.
158. Shri Rohtagi submits that this Court in Balaji
has held sub-clause (4) of Article 16 as exception
to Article 16(1) which was the premise for fixing
50%. In N.M. Thomas and Indra Sawhney now it is held
that Article 16 sub-clause (4) is not exception to
Article 16(1), the submission is that in view of the
above holding in N.M. Thomas and Indra Sawhney the
ceiling of 50% has to go. It is true that seven-
Judge Constitution Bench in N.M. Thomas held that
Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1)
which was noticed in paragraph 713 of the judgment
of   Indra  Sawhney.   Justice  B.P.  Jeevan  Reddy in
paragraph 733 said “At this stage, we see to clarify
one particular aspect. Article 16(1) is a facet of
Article 14, just as Article 14 permits reasonable
classification, so does Article 16(1)”. In paragraph
“741. ....In our respectful opinion, the
in Thomas [(1976) 2 SCC 310, 380] is the
correct one. We too believe that Article
classification for ensuring attainment of
the equality of opportunity assured by it.
For assuring equality of opportunity, it
situations to treat unequally situated
persons unequally. Not doing so, would
perpetuate    and   accentuate   inequality.
Article 16(4) is an instance of such
classification, put in to place the matter
beyond controversy. The “backward class of
citizens” are classified as a separate
category deserving a special treatment in
appointments/posts in the services of the
State. Accordingly, we hold that clause
(4) of Article 16 is not exception to
instance of classification implicit in and
permitted by clause (1)......”
159. As laid down by the Constitution Bench in Indra
Sawhney,  we   proceed  on  the   premise   that  Article
16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1). It is
also held that Article 16(4) is a facet to Article
16(1) and permits reasonable classification as is
permitted by Article 14.
160. In Balaji, the Constitution Bench did not base
its decision only on the observation that Article
15(4) is exception and proviso to Article 15(1).
Article   15(4)   was   referred    to   as   a   special
provision. In paragraph 34 of Balaji it is also laid
down that special provision contemplated by Article
15(4) like reservation of posts by Article 16(4)
must be within the reasonable limitation. We again
quote the relevant observation from paragraph 34:
reservation    should    not    be    adopted;
reservation should and must be adopted to
advance   the   prospects   of   the   weaker
sections of society, but in providing for
special measures in that behalf care
should be taken not to exclude admission
to higher educational centres to deserving
contemplated    by   Article    15(4)    like
reservation of posts and appointments
contemplated by Article 16(4) must be
within reasonable limits. The interests of
weaker sections of society which are a
first charge on the States and the Centre
have to be adjusted with the interests of
the community as a whole. The adjustment
of these competing claims is undoubtedly a
difficult matter, but if under the guise
of making a special provision, a State
reserves    practically    all   the    seats
available   in   all   the   colleges,   that
clearly would be subverting the object of
Article 15(4). In this matter again, we
are reluctant to say definitely what would
be a proper provision to make. Speaking
generally and in a broad way, a special
provision should be less than 50%; how
much less than 50% would depend upon the
present prevailing circumstances in each
case...”
161.   Both Shri Mukul Rohtagi and Shri Kapil Sibal
submits that constitutional provisions contained in
Articles 15 and     16 do not permit laying down any
percentage in measures to be taken under Articles
15(4) and 16(4). It is submitted that fixation of
percentage      of    50%    cannot      be   said     to    be
constitutional. We need to answer the question from
162.   The 50% rule spoken in Balaji and affirmed in
Indra    Sawhney    is   to   fulfill     the  objective     of
equality    as   engrafted     in   Article    14   of    which
Articles 15 and 16 are facets. The Indra Sawhney
itself gives answer of the question. In paragraph
807   of   Indra    Sawhney    held    that   what   is    more
reasonable than to say that reservation under clause
(4) shall not exceed 50% of the appointment. 50% has
been said to be reasonable and it is to attain the
objective    of   equality.    In   paragraph    807   Justice
“807. We must, however, point out that
representation       and     not     proportionate
representation. Adequate representation
representation. Principle of proportionate
representation       is    accepted      only    in
Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution
and that too for a limited period. These
articles speak of reservation of seats in
Lok Sabha and the State legislatures in
favour of Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled
Castes proportionate to their population,
but they are only temporary and special
provisions. It is therefore not possible
to accept the theory of proportionate
representation though the proportion of
population of backward classes to the
total    population    would   certainly    be
relevant. Just as every power must be
exercised reasonably and fairly, the power
conferred by clause (4) of Article 16
should also be exercised in a fair manner
and within reasonable limits — and what is
reservation under clause (4) shall not
exceed 50% of the appointments or posts,
barring certain extraordinary situations
as explained hereinafter. From this point of
view, the 27% reservation provided by the
impugned Memorandums in favour of backward
classes is well within the reasonable
limits. Together with reservation in favour
and Scheduled Tribes, it comes to a total of
49.5%. In this connection, reference
may be had to the Full Bench decision of the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in V. Narayana
Rao v. State of A.P. [AIR 1987 AP 53 : 1987
striking down the enhancement of reservation
enhancement had the effect of taking the
total reservation under Article 16(4) to
163. In paragraph 808, Justice Jeevan Reddy referred
to speech of Dr. Ambedkar where he said that the
reservation should be confined (to a minority of
seats).   The   expression   minority of   seats”.  When
translated into figure the expression less than 50%
comes into operation.
164. To change the 50% limit is to have a society
which is not founded on equality but based on caste
rule. The democracy is an essential feature of our
Constitution and part of our basic structure. If the
reservation   goes   above  50%   limit  which  is   a
reasonable, it will be slippery slope, the political
pressure, make it hardly to reduce the same. Thus,
answer to the question posed is that the percentage
of   50%  has been  arrived  at on   the principle of
reasonability and achieves equality as enshrined by
Article 14 of which Articles 15 and 16 are facets.
165.     We may notice one more submission of Shri
Rohtagi in the above context. Shri Rohtagi submits
that the Constitution of India is a living document,
ideas cannot remain frozen, even the thinking of the
framers of the Constitution cannot remain frozen for
time immemorial. Shri Rohtagi submits that due to
change in need of the society the law should change.
166.        Justice   J.M.  Shalet   and    Justice  K.N.
Grover,JJ.   Speaking   in   His  Holiness    Kesavananda
Bharati   Sripadagalvaru   vs.   State   of   Kerala  and
another, (1973) 4 SCC 225, laid down following in
“482. These petitions which have been
argued for a very long time raise momentus
issues of great constitutional importance.
Our Constitution is unique, apart from
being the longest in the world. It is
meant for the second largest population
with diverse people speaking different
religions. It was chiselled and shaped by
luminaries, most of whom had taken an
active part in the struggle for freedom
from the British yoke and who knew what
domination of a foreign rule meant in the
way of deprivation of basic freedoms and
from the point of view of exploitation of
the millions of Indians. The Constitution
is an organic document which must grow and
it must take stock of the vast socio-
economic    problems,     particularly,      of
consistent with his dignity and the unity
of the nation.
634. Every Constitution is expected to
endure for a long time. Therefore, it must
necessarily be elastic. It is not possible
to place the society in a straightjacket.
The   society    grows,    its   requirements
change. The Constitution and the laws may
have to be changed to suit those needs. No
single generation can bind the course of
the    generation     to    come.    Hence   every
Constitution, wisely drawn          up, provides
for its own amendment.”
167.      Shri   Rohtagi    has   placed   reliance  on the
judgment    of   this    Court   in   K.S.   Puttaswamy and
another vs. Union of India and others, 2017(10)SCC
1, wherein in paragraph 476 following was laid down:
“476. However,      the     learned    Attorney
General has argued in support of the
eight-Judge Bench and the six-Judge Bench,
Constitution expressly rejected the right
Constitution. While he may be right,
Constituent        Assembly       Debates     make
interesting reading only to show us what
exactly the Framers had in mind when they
framed the Constitution of India. As will
be pointed out later in this judgment, our
judgments expressly recognise that the
Constitution governs the lives of 125
crore citizens of this country and must be
interpreted to respond to the changing
needs of society at different points in
time.”
168.    Another judgment relied by Shri Rohtagi is in
Supreme    Court   Advocates-on-Record      Association and
others vs. Union of India, 1993(4) SCC 441, wherein
in paragraph 16 following has been laid down:
“16. The proposition that the provisions
of the Constitution must be confined only
to the interpretation which the Framers,
with the conditions and outlook of their
time would have placed upon them is not
acceptable and is liable to be rejected
for more than one reason — firstly, some
of the current issues could not have been
foreseen; secondly, others would not have
been discussed and thirdly, still others
may be left over as controversial issues,
i.e.   termed    as   deferred    issues    with
conflicting     intentions.     Beyond     these
reasons, it is not easy or possible to
decipher as to what were the factors that
influenced the mind of the Framers at the
time of framing the Constitution when it
is juxtaposed to the present time. The
inevitable truth is that law is not static
and   immutable     but    ever    increasingly
dynamic and grows with the ongoing passage
of time.”
169.   The   time  fleets,    generations   grow,  society
changes,   values   and   needs   also   change  by   time.
There can be no denial that law should change with
the changing time and changing needs of the society.
However, the proposition of law as noted above does
not   render   any  help   to   the  submission   of   Shri
Rohtagi that in view of needs of the society which
are changing 50% rule should be given up.
170.      The   constitutional      measures      of   providing
reservation, giving concessions and other benefits
to    backward      classes      including      socially     and
educationally    backward      class   are    all    affirmative
measures. We have completed more than 73 years of
independence,      the    Maharashtra      is     one   of   the
developed States in the country which has highest
share in the country's GST i.e. 16%, higher share in
Direct    Taxes-38%      and     higher     contribution      to
country's GDP, 38.88%. The goal of the Constitution
framers   was   to    bring   a   caste-less      society.   The
directive    principles      of   the    State     Policy   cast
onerous obligation on the States to promote welfare
of   the   people     by    securing     and    protecting    as
effectively as it may social order in which social
justice, economic and political shall inform all the
institutions     of     the    national      life.     Providing
reservation    for    advancement     of   any    socially   and
educationally backward class in public services is
not  the   only   means    and   method   for    improving   the
welfare of backward class. The State ought to bring
other    measures     including      providing       educational
facilities to the members of backward class free of
cost,    giving     concession     in    fee,   providing
opportunities for skill development to enable the
candidates   from   the   backward   class   to be   self-
reliant.
171. We recall the observation made by Justice R.V.
Raveendran in Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs. Union of India
and others, 2008(6) SCC 1, where His Lordship held
that any provision for reservation is a temporary
crutch, such crutch by unnecessary prolonged use,
should not become a permanent liability. In words of
Justice Raveendran paragraph 666 is as follows:
“666. Caste has divided this country for
ages. It has hampered its growth. To
realisation of a noble dream. To start
with, the effect of reservation may
reservation has been rather unfortunate.
In the pre-reservation era people wanted
to get rid of the backward tag—either
reservation, there is a tendency even
“forward”, to seek the “backward” tag,
in the hope of enjoying the benefits of
reservations. When more and more people
aspire for “backwardness” instead of
stagnates.    Be     that     as     it    may.
Reservation as an affirmative action is
required only for a limited period to
educationally backward classes by giving
them a gentle supportive push. But if
there is no review after a reasonable
period and if reservation is continued,
the country will become a caste divided
diversity, we will end up as a fractured
society   forever     suspicious      of   each
other. While affirmative discrimination
is a road to equality, care should be
taken that the road does not become a
rut in which the vehicle of progress
gets entrenched and stuck. Any provision
for reservation is a temporary crutch.
Such crutch by unnecessary prolonged
liability. It is significant that the
Constitution     does     not    specifically
prescribe a casteless society nor tries
discrimination in the name of caste and
by providing for affirmative action
difference in status on the basis of
caste. When the differences in status
among castes are removed, all castes
beginning for a casteless egalitarian
society.”
172.    We have no doubt that all Governments take
measures to improve the welfare of weaker sections
of   the  society   but    looking     to   the   increased
requirement of providing education including higher
education to more and more sections of society other
means and measures have to be forged. In view of the
privatisation    and   liberalisation    of   the   economy
public employment is not sufficient to cater the
needs    of   all.     More    avenues     for    providing
opportunities to members of the weaker sections of
the society and backward class to develop skills for
employment   not  necessary    the   public  service.   The
objectives engrafted in our Constituted and ideals
set  by  the  Constitution    for   the  society   and  the
Governments are still not achieved and have to be
pursued.   There   can   be  no    quarrel   that   society
changes, law changes, people changes but that does
not mean that something which is good and proven to
be beneficial in maintaining equality in the society
should also be changed in the name of change alone.
173.  In Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs.          Union of India,
(supra),    Justice Dalveer Bhandari has also laid
down that the balance should be struck to ensure
that reservation would remain reasonable. We are of
the considered opinion that the cap on percentage of
reservation as has been laid down by Constitution
Bench   in  Indra   Sawhney  is   with  the  object   of
striking a balance between the rights under Article
15(1)  and   15(4)  as  well  as  Articles    16(1)  and
16(4). The cap on percentage is to achieve principle
of equality and with the object to strike a balance
which    cannot    be   said   to   be   arbitrary    or
unreasonable.
174. The judgment of Indra Sawhney is being followed
for more than a quarter century without there being
any doubt raised in any of the judgments about the
50%, the 50% rule has been repeatedly followed.
175.    We may notice one more aspect in the above
respect.     Granville    Austin    in    “The    Indian
Constitution:    Cornerstone    of   a  Nation”    while
discussing the topic “The judiciary and the social
"The members of the Constituent Assembly
brought to the framing of the Judicial
provisions of the Constitution an idealism
equalled only by that shown towards the
Fundamental Rights. Indeed, the Judiciary
was seen as an extension of the Rights,
for it was the courts that would give the
Rights force. The Judiciary was to be an
arm of the social revolution, upholding
the equality that Indians and longed for
during colonial days, but had not gained-
colonial, and perforce repressive, but
largely because the British had feared
that social change would endanger their
rule.”
176. The Constitution enjoins a constitutional duty
to   interpret   and   protect   the  Constitution.    This
Court is guardian of the Constitution.
177.    We   may   also    quote    Justice    Mathew,   in
Keshavananda    Bharati(Supra),     where   he   reiterated
that    judicial   function    is    both    creation   and
application of law. The principle of Indra Sawhney
is both creation application of law. In paragraph,
“1705. The   judicial   function   is,    like
legislation, both creation and application of
law. The judicial function is ordinarily
determined by the general norms both as to
procedure and as to the contents of the norm
to be created, whereas legislation is usually
determined by the Constitution only in the
former respect. But that is a difference in
degree only. From a dynamic point of view, the
individual norm created by the judicial
decision is a stage in a process beginning
with    the   establishment     of    the    first
Constitution, continued by legislation and
customs,    and   leading    to    the    judicial
decisions. The Court not merely formulates
already existing law            although it is
generally asserted to be so. It does not only
previous to its decision, it does not merely
pronounce the law which exists ready and
finished prior to its pronouncement. Both in
establishing the presence of the conditions
and in stipulating the sanction, the judicial
decision has a constitutive character. The
law-creating    function   of   the    courts   is
especially manifest when the judicial decision
has the character of a precedent, and that
means when the judicial decision creates a
general norm. Where the courts are entitled
not only to apply pre-existing substantive law
in their decisions, but also to create new law
for concrete cases, there is a comprehensible
inclination to give these judicial decisions
the character of precedents. Within such a
legal system, courts are legislative organs in
exactly the same sense as the organ which is
called the legislator in the narrower and
ordinary sense of the term…””
178.   In  All   India   Reporter   Karamchari    Sangh  and
others vs. All India Reporter Limited and others,
1988   Supp   SCC  472,   a  three-Judge    Bench   speaking
through     Justice    Venkataramiah      held    that   the
decisions of the Supreme Court which is a Court of
record, constitute a source of law apart from being
a binding precedent under Article 141. Following was
Constitution   provides     that    the   law
declared by Supreme Court shall be binding
on all courts within the territory of
India. Even apart from Article 141 of the
Constitution the decisions of the Supreme
constitute a source of law as they are the
judicial precedents of the highest court
of the land. ….”
179. This Court again in Nand Kishore vs. State of
Punjab,    1995(6)  SCC  614,   laid   down  that  under
Article  141  law  declared  by   this  Court  is  of   a
binding character and as commandful as the law made
by legislative body or authorized delegate of such
body. In paragraph 17 following was laid down:
“17. …Their Lordships' decisions declare the
existing law but do not enact any fresh
law”, is not in keeping with the plenary
function of the Supreme Court under Article
141 of the Constitution, for the Court is
not merely the interpreter of the law as
existing but much beyond that. The Court as
a wing of the State is by itself a source of
law. The law is what the Court says it is.
Patently the High Court fell into an error
in its appreciation of the role of this
180.  When the Constitution Bench in Indra Sawhney
held that 50% is upper limit of reservation under
Article 16(4), it is the law which is binding under
Article 141 and to be implemented.
181.  The submission of Shri Kapil Sibal that the
judgment   of   Indra    Sawhney    is  shackle    to   the
legislature in enacting the law does not commend us.
When  the   law  is   laid   down   by  this   Court   that
reservation ought not to exceed 50% except in extra-
ordinary  circumstances      all   authorities   including
legislature and executive are bound by the said law.
There is no question of putting any shackle. It is
the law which is binding on all.
182. This Court has laid down in a large number of
cases  that   reservation     in   super-specialties    and
higher  technical    and   in  disciplines    like   atomic
research  etc.   are  not   to   be  given  which   is  law
developed  in   the  national    interest.   In  paragraph
838, Indra Sawhney has noticed certain posts where
reservations are not conducive in public interest
and the national interest. Following has been held
“838. While on Article 335, we are of
services and positions where either on
account of the nature of duties attached
to them or the level (in the hierarchy) at
which they obtain, merit as explained
hereinabove,     alone    counts.     In    such
situations, it may not be advisable to
provide for reservations. For example,
development        organisations/departments/
institutions, in specialities and super-
specialities in medicine, engineering and
other such courses in physical sciences
and mathematics, in defence services and
in the establishments connected therewith.
Similarly, in the case of posts at the
higher    echelons    e.g.,    Professors    (in
Education), Pilots in Indian Airlines and
Air India, Scientists and Technicians in
nuclear and space application, provision
for reservation would not be advisable.”
182(a).   If we accept the submission of the learned
counsel for the respondent to the logical extent
that since there is no indication in Articles 15 and
16   certain    posts   cannot   be   reserved,   no   such
exclusion could have been made. The law as existing
today  is   one   which  has  been   laid  down  in   Indra
Sawhney in paragraph 838 which is a law spelt out
from the constitutional provisions including Article
15 and 16.
183. What has been laid down by the Constitution
Bench in Indra Sawhney in paragraphs 839, 840 and
859(8) is law declared by this Court and is to be
implemented also by all concerned. The Parliament
has   passed   the   Central   Educational   Institutions
Reservation and Appointment Act, 2006 providing for
reservation- 15% for SC, 7-1/2%, 15%, 27% for other
classes     in    Central     Educational    Institutions
(Reservation    in  Admission)    Act,  2006.  Section    4
provides   that  Act   not  to  apply  in  certain   cases
“Section 4 of the Act specifically says
that the provisions of Section 3 shall
(sic/not) apply to certain institutions.
“4. Act not to apply in certain cases.—
The provisions of Section 3 of this Act
(a) a Central Educational Institution
established in the tribal areas referred
(b) the institutions of excellence,
research institutions, institutions of
national     and     strategic     importance
specified in the Schedule to this Act:
Provided that the Central Government
may, as and when considered necessary, by
notification in the Official Gazette,
(c) a Minority Educational Institution
levels of specialisation, including at
the    post-doctoral    level,   within     any
branch or study or faculty, which the
Central Government may, in consultation
with the appropriate authority, specify.”
184.      Exclusion     of     reservation     in     above
Parliamentary enactment clearly indicates that law
declared by Indra Sawhney in paragraphs 839, 840 and
859 as noted above is being understood as a law and
being  implemented,    this   reinforces   our  view   that
ceiling limit of 50% for reservation as approved by
Indra Sawhney's case is a law within the meaning of
Article    141  and   is   to   be  implemented    by   all
concerned.
185. In view of the above discussion, ground Nos. 3
and 4 as urged by Shri Mukul Rohtagi do not furnish
any ground to review Indra Sawhney or to refer the
said judgment to the larger Constitution Bench.
186.   Shri   Rohtagi    submits    that     Indra    Sawhney
judgment being judgment on Article 16(4), its ratio
cannot  be   applied   with   regard   to    Article   15(4).
Justice Jeevan Reddy before proceeding to answer the
questions framed clearly observed that the debates
of the Constituent Assembly on Article 16 and the
decision of this Court on Articles 15 and 16 and few
decisions   of   US  Supreme    Court    are   helpful.   The
observations   of   the   Court   that   decision    of  this
Court  on   Article   16   and   Article   15   are   helpful
clearly  indicate    that   principles    which   have   been
discerned for interpreting Article 16 may also be
relevant for interpretation of Article 15. Justice
Jeevan Reddy has noted two early cases on Article 15
namely   The    State    of   Madras     versus    Champakam
Dorairajan,   AIR   1951   SC   226   and   B.Venkataramana
versus State of Tamil Nadu and Another, AIR 1951 SC
229.   Justice    Jeevan   Reddy   in   paragraph    757  has
observed that although Balaji was not a case arising
under Article 16(4) but what is said about Article
15(4) came to be accepted as equally good and valid
for the purposes of Article 16(4). Justice Jeevan
“757. Though Balaji was not a case arising
under Article 16(4), what it said about
Article 15(4)came to be accepted as
equally good and valid for the purpose of
Article 16(4). The formulations enunciated
with   respect    to  Article   15(4) were,
without question, applied and adopted in
cases arising under Article 16(4). It is,
therefore, necessary to notice precisely
the formulations in Balaji relevant in
this behalf. ...
(underlined by us)”
187.      It was further held in paragraph 808 that
clause (4) of Article 16 is a means of achieving the
objective    of   equality  and   it  is   nothing  but
reinstatement of principle of equality enshrined in
Article   14.   The  relevant  observation  by  Justice
Jeevan Reddy in paragraph 808 is as follows:
“808. It needs no emphasis to say that the
principle aim of Article 14 and 16 is
equality and equality of opportunity and
that Clause (4) of Article 16 is but a means
of achieving the very same objective. Clause
(4) is a special provision - though not an
exception to Clause (1). Both the provisions
have to be harmonised keeping in mind the
fact that both are but the restatements of
the principle of equality enshrined in
Article 14. The provision under Article
16(4) -conceived in the interest of certain
sections of society - should be balanced
against the guarantee of equality enshrined
in Clause (1) of Article 16which is a
guarantee held out to every citizen and to
the entire society. It is relevant to point
out that Dr. Ambedkar himself contemplated
reservation being "confined to a minority of
seats" (See his speech in Constituent
Assembly, set out in para 28). No other
member of the Constituent Assembly suggested
reservation of a majority of seats was never
envisaged by the founding fathers. Nor are
we satisfied that the present context
requires us to depart from that concept.
(underlined by us)”
188.     Clause (4) of Article 15 is also a special
provision which is nothing but reinstatement of the
principles of equality enshrined in Article 14. The
principles which have been laid down in paragraph
808   with  respect  to   Article   16(4)  are  clearly
applicable with regard to Article 15(4) also. In the
majority judgment of this Court in Indra Sawhney,
the Balaji principle i.e. the 50 percent rule has
been approved and not departed with. The 50 percent
principle which was initially spoken of in Balaji
having been approved in Indra Sawhney. We failed to
see as to how prepositions laid down by this Court
in Indra Sawhney shall not be applicable for Article
15. It has been laid down in Indra Sawhney that
expression “Backward Class” used in Article 16(4) is
wider    that    the    expression      “Socially    and
Educationally Backward Class” used in Article 15(5).
189.   We   thus   do  not  find    any   substance  in
submissions of Mukul Rohtagi      that the judgment of
this Court in Indra Sawhney need not be applied in
reference to Article 15.
190.    Shri Rohtagi submits that in Indra Sawhney
judgment,  the  impact   of  Directive    Principles  of
State Policy such as Article 39(b)(c) and Article 46
have not been considered while interpreting Article
14, 16(1) and 16(4). The Directive Principles of
State   Policy    enshrined    in    Part-IV    of   the
Constitution are fundamental in governance of the
country.    The  State   while   framing    its   policy,
legislation, had to take measures to give effect to
the Constitutional Objective as contained in Part-IV
of   the  Constitution.   The  Fundamental    Rights  are
rights   which  the  Constitution    guarantees   to  the
Citizen whereas Part-IV of the Constitution is the
obligation of the State which it has to discharge
for securing Constitutional objective. In the most
celebrated judgment of this Court i.e. Keshavananda
Bharati Sripadagalvaru and others versus State of
Kerala and another, (1973) 4 SCC 225, in several of
the   opinions,  the   Part-III   and   Part-IV   of  the
Constitution has been dealt with. Chief Justice S.M.
Sikri,in paragraph 147 of the judgment, stated that:
“147. It is impossible to equate the
directive   principles    with    fundamental
rights though it cannot be denied that
they are very important. But to say that
the directive principles give a directive
to take away fundamental rights in order
contradiction in terms.”
191.     In  the  same   judgment,    Justice    Hegde  and
Mukherjea J.J, held that Fundamental Rights and the
Directive Principles of State Policy constitute the
conscience of our Constitution. Following was stated
“712. No one can deny the importance of
the Directive Principles. The Fundamental
Rights   and    the   Directive     Principles
constitute    the    'conscience'      of    our
egalitarian society, to free all citizens
from coercion or restriction by society
and to make liberty available for all. The
purpose of the Directive Principles is to
fix certain social and economic goals for
immediate attainment by bringing about a
non-violent social revolution. Through
such a social revolution the Constitution
seeks to fulfil the basic needs of the
common man and to change the structure of
bur society. It aims at making the Indian
masses free in the positive sense.”
192.     The  Constitution    Bench   of  this    Court  in
Minerva Mills limited and others versus Union of
India   and  others,   (1980)   3   SCC   625,    has  also
elaborately   dealt    both   Fundamental      Rights   and
Directive Principles of State Policy. The question
which arose before the Constitution bench in context
of Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of
State   Policy   was   noticed   by  Justice   Chandrachud,
petitions     centres    round    the   question
whether the directive principles of State
policy contained in Part IV can have
primacy     over    the    fundamental    rights
conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
That is the heart of the matter. Every
contentions are in the nature of by-
products of that central theme of the
case. The competing claims of parts III
and IV constitute the pivotal point of the
case because, Article 31C as amended by
section 4 of the 42nd Amendment provides
in terms that a law giving effect to any
directive principle cannot be challenged
as void on the ground that it violates the
rights conferred by Article 14 or The 42nd
subordinates      the     fundamental     rights
conferred by Articles 14 and 19 to the
directive principles.”
193.      It was held that both Part-III and Part-IV
of   the   Constitution     are   two   kinds   of  State’s
obligation i.e. negative and positive. The harmony
and balance between Fundamental Rights and Directive
Principles of State Policy is an essential feature
of the Basic Structure of the Constitution. Justice
Chandrachud elaborating the relation between Part-
III and Part-IV stated in paragraph 57: -
“57. This is not mere semantics. The
edifice of our Constitution is built upon
the concepts crystallised in the Preamble.
We resolved to constitute ourselves into a
Socialist State which carried with it the
justice-social, economic and political.
Constitution      containing       directive
principles of State policy which specify
the socialistic goal to be achieved. We
promised to our people a democratic polity
which carries with it the obligation of
securing to the people liberty of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship;
equality of status and of opportunity and
the assurance that the dignity of the
individual will at all costs be preserved.
Constitution conferring those rights on
the people. Those rights are not an end in
themselves but are the means to an end.
The   end  is   specified    in   Part   IV.
Therefore, the rights conferred by Art III
are subject to reasonable restrictions and
the Constitution provides that enforcement
of some of them may, in stated uncommon
circumstances, be suspended. But just as
the rights conferred by Part III would be
without a radar and a compass if they were
not geared to an ideal, in the same manner
the attainment of the ideals set out in
achieving that ideal is human freedoms.
One of the faiths of our founding fathers
was the purity of means. Indeed, under our
law, even a dacoit who has committed a
exercise of right of self-defence after he
has made good his escape. So great is the
insistence of civilised laws on the purity
of means. The goals set out in Part IV
have, therefore, to be achieved without
the abrogation of the means provided for
Parts III and IV together constitute the
core of our Constitution and combine to
form     its    conscience.    Anything    that
destroys the balance between the two parts
will ipso facto destroy an essential
element of the basic structure of our
194.      Article 38 of Directive Principles of State
Policy oblige the State to strive to promote the
welfare of the people by securing and protecting as
effectively     as  it  may   a  social   order  in   which
justice social, economic and political shall inform
all the institutions of national life. Article 15(4)
and Article 16(4) of the Constitution are nothing
but steps in promoting and giving effect to policy
under Article 38 of the Constitution. Justice Jeevan
Reddy in his judgment of Indra Sawhney has noted
Article    38   and   Article   46  of   Part-IV   of   the
Constitution. In paragraph 647, Article 38 and 46
has been notice in following words: -
Constitution having a bearing on Article
Article 38 obligates the State to "strive
to promote the welfare of the people by
securing and protecting as effectively as
it may a social order in which justice,
social, economic and political, shall
195.     The criticism mounted by Mr. Rohtagi that
Indra Sawhney judgment does not consider the impact
of   Directive    Principles     of   State   Policy   while
interpreting Article 16 is thus not correct. Further
in paragraph 841, it has been held that there is no
particular relevance of Article 38 in context of
Article 16(4). In paragraph 841, following has been
“841. We may add that we see no particular
context. Article 16(4) is also a measure a
measure to ensure equality of status
besides equality of opportunity.”
196.     Mr. Rohtagi has referred to Article 39(b)
and   Article   39(c)     of  the   Constitution   and   has
submitted that there is no consideration in Indra
Sawhney   judgment.   Article   39  of  the   Constitution
enumerates    certain   principles    of  policy    to  be
followed   by  the  State.   Article   39  (b)  and  39(c)
which   are  relevant   for   the  present   case  are  as
“39. Certain principles of policy to be
(b) that the ownership and control of the
material resources of the community are so
distributed as best to subserve the common
(c) that the operation of the economic
concentration of wealth and means of
production to the common detriment;”
197.     We fail to see that how the measures taken
under Article 15(4) and 16(4) shall in any manner
can be read to breach Directive Principles of State
Policy. Article 16(4) and 15(4) are also measures to
ensure equality of status besides the equality of
opportunity.
198.      We thus do not find any substance in the
above submission of Mr. Mukul Rohtagi.
199.     Shri Rohtagi submits that an Eleven-Judge
Bench of this Court in T.M.A. Pai foundation and
others versus State of Karnataka and others, (2002)
8 SCC 481, has struck down the law laid down by this
Court in St. Stephen’s College case, (1992) 1 SCC
558 which had held that aided minority educational
institutions although entitled to preferably admit
their community candidate but intake should not be
more than 50 percent. Shri Rohtagi submits that St.
Stephen's College case has put a cap of 50 percent
which was nothing but recognition of Indra Sawhney
Principle.   Shri  Rohtagi  submits  that  the Eleven-
Judge Bench in T.M.A. Pai Foundation case has set
aside the aforesaid cap of 50 percent. Mr. Rohtagi
relies on paragraph 151 of Kirpal,C.J. and paragraph
338 by Rumapal, J. of the judgment, which is to the
“151. The right of the aided minority
institution to preferably admit students of
its   community,   when   Article   29(2) was
applicable, has been clarified by this Court
over a decade ago in the St. Stephen's
College case. While upholding the procedure
for admitting students, this Court also held
that aided minority educational institutions
were entitled to preferably admit their
community candidates so as to maintain the
minority character of the institution, and
that the state may regulate the intake in
this category with due regard to the area
that the institution was intended to serve,
but that this intake should not be more than
50% in any case. Thus, St. Stephen's
endeavoured to strike a balance between the
two Articles. Though we accept the ratio of
St. Stephen's, which has held the field for
reservations     in    accepting   the     rigid
percentage stipulated therein. As Article 29
institutions of higher education but also to
schools, a ceiling of 50% would not be
proper. It will be more appropriate that
depending upon the level of the institution,
whether it be a primary or secondary or high
school    or   a   college,   professional    or
otherwise,    and   on   the   population    and
educational needs of the area in which the
institution is to be located the state
properly balances the interests of all by
providing for such a percentage of students
of the minority community to be admitted, so
as to adequately serve the interest of the
community for which the institution was
established.
388. I agree with the view as expressed by
the Learned Chief Justice that there is no
question of fixing a percentage when the
need may be variable. I would only add that
in fixing a percentage, the Court in St.
Stephens in fact "reserved" 50% of available
seats in a minority institution for the
general category ostensibly under Article
individual and is not a class right. It
would therefore apply when an individual is
denied    admission   into    any   educational
institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid from the State funds, solely
on the basis of the ground of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them. It
does not operate to create a class interest
or right in the sense that any educational
institution has to set apart for non-
minorities as a class and without reference
to   any   individual    applicant,    a   fixed
percentage    of   available    seats.    Unless
Articles 30(1) and 29(2) are allowed to
operate in their separate fields then what
started with the voluntary 'sprinkling' of
outsiders, would become a major inundation
and a large chunk of the right of an aided
minority institution to operate for the
benefit of the community it was set up to
serve, would be washed away.”
200.     T.M.A. Pai foundation case was a judgment of
this Court interpreting Article 29 and 30 of the
Constitution. Article 30 of the Constitution gives a
Fundamental Right to the minorities to establish and
administer   educational   institutions.   The  Right  of
minority    is   different   and    distinct   right   as
recognized       in      the      Constitution.       The
93rdConstitutional    Amendment   Act,  2005,   by  which
sub-clause (5) has been added in Article 15 excludes
the minority educational institutions referred to in
clause (1) of Article 30. Sub-clause (5) of Article
15   is   clear   constitutional     indication  that   with
regard to rights of minority regarding admission to
educational institutions, the minority educational
institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30
are completely excluded. What was laid down by this
Court in T.M.A. Pai foundation case, finds clear
epoch in the 93rd Constitutional Amendment.
201.       We may refer to a Three-Judge Bench judgment
of   this    Court   in   Society   for   Un-aided   Private
Schools    of   Rajasthan    versus   Union  of  India   and
another,(2012)      6   SCC   1,   where   this  Court   had
occasion to consider Article 14, 15 & 16 as well as
21A    of    the   Constitution.     Shri   Kapadia,   C.J.,
speaking for majority, held that reservation of 25
percent     in   unaided    minority   schools   result   in
changing character of schools holding that Section
12(1)(c) of Right to Education Act, 2009 violates
right conferred under        minority school under Article
31. Paragraphs 61 and 62 of the judgment are as
“61. Article 15(5)is an enabling provision
and it is for the respective States either
to enact a legislation or issue an executive
instruction providing for reservation except
in   the   case   of    minority    educational
institutions referred to in Article 30(1).
The intention of the Parliament is that the
minority educational institution referred to
in Article 30(1) is a separate category of
institutions   which   needs   protection    of
Article 30(1) and viewed in that light we
are of the view that unaided minority
school(s) needs special protection under
Article    30(1).    Article     30(1)is    not
conditional as Article 19(1)(g).In a sense,
it is absolute as the Constitution framers
Government of the day to protect the
minorities in the matter of preservation of
establishment of educational institutions
for religious and charitable purposes [See:
62. Reservations of 25% in such unaided
minority schools result in changing the
character of the schools if right to
establish and administer such schools flows
from the right to conserve the language,
script or culture, which right is conferred
on such unaided minority schools. Thus, the
2009 Act including Section 12(1)(c) violates
the right conferred on such unaided minority
schools under Article 30(1). ”
202.     From  the  law  as   laid  down  in  T.M.A.  Pai
foundation Case (supra)as well as Society for Un-
aided   Private  Schools   of   Rajasthan(supra),  it  is
clear that there can be no reservation in unaided
minority schools    referred in Article 30(1).
203.   The 50 percent ceiling as put by this Court in
St. Stephen’s College case was struck off by T.M.A.
Pai Foundation case to give effect to content and
meaning of Article 30.      The striking of the cap of
50 percent with regard to minority institutions is
an   entirely   different   context   and   can  have  no
bearing with regard to 50 percent cap which has been
approved in the reservation under Article 16(4) in
the Indra Sawhey’s case.
204.   We thus are of the view that judgment of this
Court in T.M.A. Pai Foundation case has no bearing
on the ratio of Indra Sawhney’s case.
205.      Shri Rohtagi relying on Constitutional 77th
and 81st Amendment Acts submits that these amendments
have the effect of undoing in part the judgment of
Indra Sawhney which necessitates revisiting of the
judgment. By the 77thConstitutional Amendment Act,
1995, sub-clause (4A) was inserted in Article 16 of
the Constitution. The above Constitutional Amendment
was brought to do away the law laid down by this
Court   in   Indra   Sawhney    that   no   reservation   in
promotion can be granted. By virtue of sub-clause 4A
of Article 16 now, the reservation in promotion is
permissible in favour of Scheduled Caste, Scheduled
Tribe.   The   ratio   of   Indra   Sawhney  to  the   above
effect   no  longer    survives    and  the  Constitutional
provisions have to be give effect to. There can be
no case for revisiting the Indra Sawhney judgment on
this   ground.     Now    coming    to   81stConstitutional
Amendment Act, 2000, by which sub-clause (4B) was
inserted in Article 16. The above provision was also
to undo the ratio laid down by the Indra Sawhney
judgment    regarding    carry    forward   vacancies.   The
Constitutional Amendment laid down that in unfilled
vacancies    of   year   which    was  reserved   shall   be
treated as separate class of vacancies to be filled
up in any succeeding year or years and such class of
vacancies shall not be considered together with the
vacancies of the year in which they are being filled
up for determine the ceiling of 50 percent. Article
(4B) is for any reference is quoted as below: -
“16(4B). Nothing in this article shall
prevent the State from considering any
unfilled vacancies of a year which are
reserved for being filled up in that year
in accordance with any provision for
reservation made under clause (4) or
succeeding year or years and such class of
vacancies shall not be considered together
with the vacancies of the year in which
they are being filled up for determining
the ceiling of fifty per cent reservation
on total number of vacancies of that
year.”
206.  The   above  Constitutional   Amendment makes  it
very   clear  that   ceiling  of  50  percent “has  now
received Constitutional recognition.” Ceiling of 50
percent is ceiling which was approved by this Court
in Indra Sawhney’s case, thus, the Constitutional
Amendment in fact recognize the 50 percent ceiling
which was approved in Indra Sawhney’s case and on
the basis of above Constitutional Amendment, no case
has been made out to revisit Indra Sawhney.
207. Shri Rohtagi submits that judgment of Indra
held that the States cannot identify the backward
classes solely on the basis of economic criteria as
Indra   Sawhney    has   set   aside   the   O.M.  dated
13.08.1990 which provided 10 percent reservation to
economically weaker section. The submission of Shri
Rohtagi  is  that   by  103rdConstitutional   Amendment,
Parliament   has  inserted   Article   15(6)   and 16(6)
whereby   10   percent    reservation   is   granted  to
economically weaker section.
208. It is submitted that in view of the 10 percent
reservation    as   mandated    by   103rdConstitutional
amendment, 50 percent reservation as laid down by
Indra Sawhney is breached. Shri Rohtagi has further
submitted     that     the    issue     pertaining    to
103rdConstitutional Amendment has been referred to a
larger Bench in W.P. (Civil) No.55 of 2019, Janhit
Abhiyan versus Union of India. In view of above, We
refrain   ourselves     from    making    any   observation
regarding      effect     and    consequence      of    103rd
209. Shri Rohtagi submits that in paragraph 810 of
judgment   of   Indra   Sawhney,    certain   extraordinary
circumstances have been referred to which cannot be
said   to   be   cast   in    stone.   The   extra-ordinary
circumstances provided in paragraph 810 i.e. of far-
flung and remote area cannot be cast in stone and
forever unchanging. He submits that the same was
given   only    by  way    of   example    and   cannot   be
considered exhaustive. Morever, it is geographical
test   which    may   not   apply   in   every   State.   In
paragraph 810 of Indra Sawhney, Justice Jeevan Reddy
“810. While 50% shall be the rule, it is
necessary not to put out of consideration
certain extraordinary situations inherent
in the great diversity of this country and
the people. It might happen that in far-
flung and remote areas the population
inhabiting those areas might, on account
of their being put of the mainstream of
national life and in view of conditions
peculiar to and characteristical to them,
need to be treated in a different way,
some relaxation in this strict rule may
become imperative. In doing so, extreme
caution is to be exercised and a special
210.      We   fully  endorse   the  submission   of   Shri
Rohtagi that extraordinary situations indicated in
paragraph 810 were only illustrative and cannot be
said to be exhaustive. We however do not agree with
Mr.   Rohtagi    that  paragraph   810  provided   only    a
geographical test. The use of expression “on being
out  of   the   main  stream  of  national   life”,   is   a
social test, which also needs to be fulfilled for a
case to be covered by exception.
211.      We may refer to a Three-Judge Bench judgment
of this Court in Union of India and others versus
Rakesh Kumar and others,(2010) 4 SCC 50, this Court
had occasion to consider the provisions of Fifth
Schedule    of   the  Constitution.    Article   243B   and
provisions of Part-IX of the Constitution inserted
by     73rdConstitutional      Amendment     Act,     1992.
Reservation    of   seats   was   contemplated    in  the
statutory provisions. The judgment of Indra Sawhney
especially paragraph 809 and 810 were also noted and
extracted by this Court. This Court noted that even
the judgment of Indra Sawhney did recognize the need
for exception treatment in such circumstances. In
paragraph   44,   this  Court  held   that  the  case  of
Panchayats in Scheduled Areas is a fit case that
warrant   exceptional     treatment    with   regard   to
reservation and the rationale of upper ceiling of 50
percent for reservation in         higher education and
public employment can be readily extended to the
domain of vertical representation at the Panchayat
level in the Scheduled Area. Paragraphs 43 and 44
“43. For the sake of argument, even if an
analogy between Article 243-Dand Article
16(4)was viable, a close reading of the
Indra Sawhney decision will reveal that
even though an upper limit of 50% was
prescribed for reservations in public
recognise     the   need    for   exceptional
treatment in some circumstances. This is
evident from the following words (at
"809. From the above discussion, the
irresistible conclusion that follows
is that the reservations contemplated
in Clause (4) of Article 16 should not
exceed 50%.
consideration certain extraordinary
people. It might happen that in far-
flung and remote areas the population
characteristical to them, need to be
44. We believe that the case of Panchayats
in Scheduled Areas is a fit case that
warrants exceptional treatment with regard
to reservations. The rationale behind
reservations for higher education and
public   employment    cannot    be   readily
extended to the domain of political
representation at the Panchayat-level in
Scheduled Areas. With respect to education
and   employment,   parity    is   maintained
between the total number of reserved and
unreserved seats in order to maintain a
pragmatic balance between the affirmative
action measures and considerations of
merit.”
212.  This    Court  carved    out   one   more  exceptional
circumstance      which    may    fit    in    extraordinary
situations as contemplated by paragraph 810 in the
Indra Sawhney’s case. We may also notice that the
Constitution     Bench   of  this    Court   in  K.   Krishna
Murthy and others versus Union of India and another,
(2010) 7 SCC 202. In paragraph 82(iv) applied 50
percent ceiling in vertical reservation in favour of
Class in context of local self government. However,
it was held that exception can be made in order to
safeguard the interest of Scheduled Tribes located
in Scheduled Area. Paragraph 82(iv) is as follows: -
“82.(iv) The upper ceiling of 50% vertical
reservations in favour of SCs/STs/OBCs
should not be breached in the context of
local self-government. Exceptions can only
interests of the Scheduled Tribes in the
panchayats     located     in    the    Scheduled
213.    The judgment of the Constitution Bench in the
above    case   had   approved     the   Three-Judge    Bench
judgment of this Court in Union of India and others
Rakesh Kumar(supra) in paragraph 67, which is to the
“67. In the recent decision reported as
Union of India v. Rakesh Kumar, (2010) 4
SCC 50, this Court has explained why it
may be necessary to provide reservations
in favour of Scheduled Tribes that exceed
50% of the seats in panchayats located in
Scheduled Areas. However, such exceptional
considerations cannot be invoked when we
are examining the quantum of reservations
in favour of backward classes for the
purpose of local bodies located in general
areas. In such circumstances, the vertical
reservations   in  favour   of   SC/ST/OBCs
cannot exceed the upper limit of 50% when
taken together. It is obvious that in
order to adhere to this upper ceiling,
some of the States may have to modify
their legislations so as to reduce the
quantum of the existing quotas in favour
of OBCs.”
214.     We thus are of the view that extraordinary
situations   indicated  in  paragraph   810  are only
illustrative and not exhaustive but paragraph 810
gives an indication as to which may fit in extra
ordinary situation.
215.      In view of foregoing discussions, we do not
find any substance in grounds raised by Shri Rohtagi
for re-visiting the judgment of Indra Sawhney and
referring the judgment of Indra Sawhney to a larger
The   judgment   of   Indra   Sawhney    has   been
repeatedly followed by this Court and has received
approval by at least four Constitution Benches of
this   Court  as  noted  above.   We   also  follow  and
reiterate   the  prepositions  as  laid   down  by  this
Court in Indra Sawhney in paragraphs 809 and 810. We
further   observe  that  ratio  of   judgment  of  Indra
Sawhney is fully applicable in context of Article 15
of the Constitution.
216. The seven-Judge Constitution Bench judgment in
Keshav Mills [Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. v. CIT, AIR 1965
SC 1636 has unanimously held that before reviewing
and revising its earlier decision the Court must
itself satisfy whether it is necessary to do so in
the   interest    of  public   good   or   for   any   other
compelling reason and the Court must endeavour to
maintain     a   certainty    and    continuity    in    the
interpretation of the law in the country.
217. In Jarnail Singh and others vs. Lachhmi Narain
Gupta and others, 2018(10) SCC 396, the prayer to
refer the Constitution Bench judgment in M.Nagaraj
(supra)    was  rejected    by  the    Constitution    Bench
relying on the law as laid down in Keshav Mills'
case. In paragraph 9 following has been laid down:
unanimous Constitution Bench judgment, it is
important to bear in mind the admonition of
the Constitution Bench judgment in Keshav
Mills [Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. v. CIT, (1965)
said: (SCR pp. 921-22 : AIR p. 1644, para
and Petlad Turkey Red Dye Works Co.
this Court should ask itself whether in
the interests of the public good or for
any other valid and compulsive reasons,
decision should be revised. When this
Court decides questions of law, its
territory of India, and so, it must be
the constant endeavour and concern of
this Court to introduce and maintain an
element of certainty and continuity in
country. Frequent exercise by this
earlier decisions on the ground that
reasonable, may incidentally tend to
confusion which must be consistently
avoided. That is not to say that if on
a subsequent occasion, the Court is
satisfied that its earlier decision was
clearly erroneous, it should hesitate
previous decision is pronounced to be
plainly erroneous, the Court must be
unanimity amongst its members that a
desirable, and in any case it would be
inexpedient to lay down any principles
which should govern the approach of the
Court in dealing with the question of
reviewing and revising its earlier
decisions. It would always depend upon
several relevant considerations: — What
is the nature of the infirmity or error
revision of the earlier view is based?
patent aspects of the question remain
unnoticed, or was the attention of the
material statutory provision, or was
any previous decision of this Court
bearing on the point not noticed? Is
unanimous that there is such an error
in the earlier view? What would be the
good? Has the earlier decision been
followed on subsequent occasions either
And, would the reversal of the earlier
decision lead to public inconvenience,
hardship or mischief? These and other
carefully borne in mind whenever this
Court is called upon to exercise its
jurisdiction to review and revise its
earlier decisions. These considerations
become still more significant when the
unanimous decision of a Bench of five
learned Judges of this Court.”
218.     The principle of stare decisis also commends
us not to accept the submissions of Shri Rohtagi.
The Constitution Bench of this Court in State of
Gujarat versus Mirzapur, Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat
and   others,   (2005)   8  SCC  534,  explaining   the
principle of Stare decisis laid down following in
“111. Stare decisis is a Latin phrase
which means “stand by decided cases; to
uphold precedents; to maintain former
adjudication”. This principle is expressed
in the maxim “stare decisis et non quieta
movere” which means to stand by decisions
and not to disturb what is settled. This
was aptly put by Lord Coke in his classic
English version as “Those things which
have been so often adjudged ought to rest
in peace”. However, according to Justice
Frankfurter, the doctrine of stare decisis
is    not    “an    imprisonment      of   reason”
underlying logic of the doctrine is to
uncertainty. The guiding philosophy is
that a view which has held the field for a
long time should not be disturbed only
because another view is possible.
118. The doctrine of stare decisis is
generally to be adhered to, because well-
settled principles of law founded on a
series     of   authoritative     pronouncements
ought to be followed. Yet, the demands of
the     changed    facts    and   circumstances,
dictated by forceful factors supported by
logic, amply justify the need for a fresh
look.”
219.    The    Constitution    Bench    in    Indra   Sawhney
speaking through Justice Jeevan Reddy has held that
the relevance and significance of the principle of
stare    decisis   have   to  be   kept   in   mind.   It was
reiterated that in law certainty, consistency and
continuity are highly desirable features. Following
are the exact words in paragraph 683:-
larger Bench, we have kept in mind the
certainty, consistency and continuity are
highly    desirable      features.    Where    a
decision has stood the test of time and
has never been doubted, we have respected
compelling and strong reasons to depart
from it. Where, however, such uniformity
is not found, we have tried to answer the
question on principle keeping in mind the
scheme and goal of our Constitution and
the material placed before us.”
220. What was said by Constitution Bench in Indra
Sawhney clearly binds us. Judgment of Indra Sawhney
has  stood   the  test    of   time  and   has   never   been
doubted. On the clear principle of stare decisis,
judgment   of   Indra    Sawhney    neither    need   to   be
revisited   nor  referred     to   larger   bench   of   this
221.     The principle laid down in Keshav Mills when
applied in the facts of the present case, it is
crystal clear that no case is made out to refer the
case of Indra Sawhney to a larger Bench.
(9)Whether Gaikwad Commission Report has made out a
case of extra-ordinary situation for grant of
separate     reservation    to    Maratha   community
222.     We have noticed above that majority judgment
in   Indra   Sawhney  has  laid  down   that reservation
shall not exceed 50% as a rule. In the majority
opinion, however, it was held that looking to the
diversity of the country there may be some extra-
ordinary situations where reservation in exceptional
cases is made exceeding 50% limit. In this respect,
We may again refer to paragraphs 809 and 810 of the
judgment    of   Indra  Sawhney   by   which  the  above
proposition of law was laid down. Paragraphs 809 and
“809. From the above discussion, the
irresistible conclusion that follows is that
the reservations contemplated in clause (4)
of Article 16 should not exceed 50%.
810. While 50% shall be the rule, it is
necessary not to put out of consideration
certain extraordinary situations inherent
in the great diversity of this country and
the people. It might happen that in far
flung and remote areas the population
inhabiting those areas might, on account of
their being out of the mainstream of
national life and in view of conditions
peculiar to and characteristical to them,
need to be treated in a different way, some
relaxation in this strict rule may become
imperative. In doing so, extreme caution is
to be exercised and a special case made
out.”
223.     The second term of reference to the State
Backward   Classes   Commission   included   a  specific
reference,      i.e.,     “to     define     exceptional
circumstances and/or extra-ordinary situations to be
applied   for   the  benefit   of  reservation   in  the
present    context”.   The    Gaikwad   Commission   has
separately and elaborately considered the above term
of reference. A separate Chapter, Chapter-X has been
devoted in the Commission's Report. The heading of
the Chapter-X is “EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES AND/OR
224.     We have already noticed the submission of
Shri  Mukul   Rohtagi  with   reference  to  exceptional
circumstances while considering the Ground No.10 as
emphasized by him for referring the case to a larger
Bench.   We   have   observed    that    the   exceptional
circumstances as indicated in paragraph 810 of Indra
Sawhney were not exhaustive but illustrative. The
Constitution Bench, however, has given indication of
what could be the extra-ordinary circumstances for
exceeding   the   limit   of  50%.   The   Commission  has
noticed the majority opinion in Indra Sawhney. We
may notice paragraph 234-Chapter X of the Report
“234.    The     Constitutional        provisions
relating to the reservations, either under
Article 15 or Article 16 of the Constitution
do not prescribe percentage of reservation
to be provided to each of the backward
classes i.e. Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes   and    Backward    Classes.     However,
reservations to be provided to the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes has already been
provided by the Government of India, i.e.
15% Scheduled Castes and 7.5% for Scheduled
Tribes. Excluding that 22.5% reservations,
the existing Bus provisions for reservation
for   Backward     Classes    is   27%.    Though
originally Article 15 and Article 16 of the
997   Constitution     did   not    specify   the
percentage of the reservation for different
classes, the amended provisions of Article
16(4A) and (4B) specify that the State
Government is not prevented from considering
any unfilled vacancies of a year which are
reserved for being filled up in that year in
reservation made under Article 16(4) or (4A)
as a separate class of vacancies to be
filled up in any succeeding year or years
and such class of vacancies shall not be
considered together with the vacancies of
the year in which they are being filled up
reservation on total number of vacancies of
that year. In Indra Sawhney 's case (supra),
the Honourable the Supreme Court for the
first time, by majority, specified a ceiling
Honourable the Supreme Court considered this
issue while answering question Nos. 6(a),
6(b) and 6(c) formulated by it in the
Judgment. The questoins are produced herein
“6(A)Whether the 50% rule enunciated in
Balaji a binding rule or only a rule of
6(b)Whether the 50% rule, if any, is
confined to reservations made under
Clause (4) of Article 16 or whether it
takes in all types of reservations that
6(c)Further while applying 50% rule, if
any, whether an year should be taken as
a unit or whether the total strength of
The Honourable the Supreme Court in para 94A
in answered the questions Indra Sawhney 's
reservation contemplated in clause (4) of
Article 16 of the Constitution shall not
exceed 50%. In the same para the Honourable
the Supreme Court has ruled that some
relaxation in this TIRNITURE DIVIST strict
rule may become imperative with a caution.
"In doing so extreme caution is to be
exercised and a special case is to be made
out”. The relevant passage from para 94A (of
AIR) the judgment of the Honourable the
Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney 's case
majority view is reproduced and that runs as
necessary not to put out of consideration
certain extraordinary situations inherent in
the great diversity of this country and the
people. It might happen that in far flung
and remote areas the population inhabiting
those areas might, on account of their being
out of the main stream of national life and
in view of conditions peculiar to and
characteristical to them, need to be treated
in a different way, some relaxation in this
strict rule may become imperative. In doing
so, extreme caution is to be exercised and a
special case made out.”
225.     After noticing the above proposition of law
the Commission proceeded to deal with the subject.
In   paragraph  234  the  Commission  has  noted  the
Constitution Bench judgment in M. Nagaraj & Ors. vs.
Union of India & Ors. (supra) observing that this
Court has again considered the aspect of ceiling of
50% reservation. The Commission, however, proceeded
with an assumption that in Nagaraj this Court has
ruled that for relaxation, i.e.,       50%, there should
be quantifiable and contemporary data. We may notice
the exact words of the Commission in paragraph 234
"The Honourable the Supreme Court has again
considered this aspect of ceiling of 50%
reservation in its next decision in M.
Nagaraj & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
Reported in (2006) 8 SCC 212, wherein the
Honourable the Supreme Court considered the
validity of inserted clauses (4A) and (4B)
by way of amendment to Article 16 of the
Constitution. However, in Nagaraj,           the
Honourable the Supreme Court has ruled that
for the relaxation i.e. a ceiling of 50%
contemporary data (Emphasis supplied).”
226.    The above view has again been reiterated by
the  Commission    n  paragraph   235  to  the  following
“235.......However, it is seen from
Nagaraj that ceiling of 50% reservation may
be    exceeded     by    showing    quantifiable
contemporary data relating to backwardness
as required by Clause (4) of Article 15 and
227. From the above, it is clear that the Commission
read the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court
in   Nagaraj   laying   down   that    ceiling    of   50%
reservation may be exceeded by showing quantifiable
contemporary data relating to the backwardness. The
above reading of Constitution Bench judgment by the
Commission was wholly incorrect. We may again notice
the judgment of M. Nagaraj in the above respect. M.
Nagaraj was a case where Constitution (Eighty-fifth
Amendment) Act, 2001 inserting Article 16(4A) was
challenged on the ground that the said provision is
unconstitutional and violative of basic structure.
Article   16(4A)  which  was   inserted    by   the  above
“Article 16(4A). Nothing in this Article
shall prevent the State from making any
provision for reservation in matters of
promotion, with consequential seniority, to
services under the State in favour of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
which, in the opinion of the State, are not
adequately represented in the services under
the State.”
228.     The Constitution Bench proceeded to consider
the submission raised by the petitioner challenging
the  constitutional   validity  of   the  constitutional
provision.   The Constitution    Bench   in   Nagaraj  has
noticed   the   maximum   limit    of   reservation   in
paragraphs 55 to 59. The Constitution Bench held
that majority opinion in Indra Sawhney has held that
rule of 50% was a binding rule and not a mere rule
of prudence.   Paragraph 58 of the Constitution Bench
prudence.”
229.    In   paragraph  107,   the  Constitution   Bench
backwardness and inadequacy then the
maintenance of efficiency which is
limitation on the discretion of the
indicated by Article 335.....”
230.     The Constitution Bench noted its conclusion
in paragraphs 121, 122 and 123. In paragraph 123
“123. However, in this case, as stated
above, the main issue concerns the “extent
of reservation”. In this regard the State
concerned will have to show in each case
the existence of the compelling reasons,
namely,   backwardness,    inadequacy    of
representation and overall administrative
efficiency before making provision for
reservation. As stated above, the impugned
provision is an enabling provision. The
State is not bound to make reservation for
SCs/STs in matters of promotions. However,
if they wish to exercise their discretion
and make such provision, the State has to
collect    quantifiable    data     showing
backwardness of the class and inadequacy
of representation of that class in public
employment in addition to compliance with
Article 335. It is made clear that even if
the State has compelling reasons, as
stated above, the State will have to see
that its reservation provision does not
lead to excessiveness so as to breach the
ceiling limit of 50% or obliterate the
creamy layer or extend the reservation
indefinitely.”
231.     The Constitution Bench in paragraph 123 held
that  provision  of  Article  16(4A)  is  an  enabling
provision and State is not bound to make reservation
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the
matters of promotion and however, if they wish to
exercise their discretion and make such provision,
the State has to collect quantifiable data showing
backwardness    of   the  class   and    inadequacy   of
representation.
232.   The above observation regarding quantifiable
data was in relation to enabling power of the State
to grant reservation in promotion to the Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribes. It is further relevant
to notice that in the last sentence of paragraph 123
it is stated: "It is made clear that even if the
State has compelling reasons, as stated above, the
State   will   have   to  see   that   its   reservation
provision does not lead to excessiveness so as to
breach the ceiling limit of 50% or obliterate the
creamy     layer     or   extend     the     reservation
indefinitely”.
233.   The Constitution Bench, thus, in the above
case clearly laid down that even reservation for
promotion, ceiling of 50% limit cannot be breached.
The Commission has completely erred in understanding
the ratio of the judgment, when the Commission took
the view that on the quantifiable data ceiling of
50% can be breached. There is no such ratio laid
down by this Court in M. Nagaraj.         Hence, the very
basis   of  the   Commission    to   proceed   to   examine
quantifiable data for exceeding the limit of 50% is
unfounded.
234.   Paragraph 236 of the Report of the Commission
contains a heading “QUANTIFIABLE DATA”. It is useful
to extract the entire paragraph 236 which is to the
2011 population of Scheduled Castes and
respectively. The percentage of Backward
Classes, Maratha and Kunbi, have not been
Maharashtra, the Gokhale Institute of
Politics and Economics, Pune, conducted
Socio- Economic Caste Census. It was the
survey of rural population in the State
of Maharashtra. On the detailed survey
the Gokhale Institute of Politics and
Economics     recorded    the    findings     on
specific     percentage    of    the    Maratha
community with Kunbi community as 35.7%.
Percentage of all the reserved Backward
Classes to be 48.6%. The percentage of
other Classes or the population, who have
not disclosed their castes, is shown to
be 15.7%, From this survey report though
percentage    of   the    exiting    Backward
Classes, Maratha and Kunbi, who claim to
be backward, comes to 48.6% plus 35.7%
population. There is no dispute that
large population of the Maratha and Kunbi
castes as well as existing Backward
Classes are inhabitants of the rural
areas. 48.6% population of the existing
reserved   category    including    Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and all Backward
Classes have been already identified as
socially and educationally backward. The
socially, educationally and economically
backward by this Commission. So as total
84.3% population can be said to be of
backward classes.”
235.   Regarding the above noted quantifiable data,
the   Commission   has   recorded    its   reasons   for
reservation   under   Article    15(4)   and   16(4)  in
paragraph 259. We extract here paragraph 259 to the
“259. To sum up this Commission already
found above on appreciation of evidence
collected/produced before it that 80% to
85% of the population in the State of
Maharashtra is backward. According to
this Commission to accommodate the 80% to
85% backward Population within a ceiling
of 50% will be injustice to them and as
such it would frustrate the very purpose
of the reservation policy arising out of
Constitution. In the considered opinion
of this Commission, this is the extra
ordinary   situation,   which    has   been
mentioned in the 2nd Term of Reference
and as required by Indra Sawhney . 80% to
85% backward population adverted to above
speaks about quantifiable contemporary
data, vide Nagaraj. If, accordingly,
ceiling of 50% increased efficiency in
administration could not be affected
because all of them would compete. This
Commission record facts findings that as
required by the 2nd Term of Reference
circumstances but also extra ordinary
situations, which need to be applied for
present context in view of Clause (4) of
Article 15 and Clause (4) of Article 16
of the Constitution.) This will enable
the Government of Maharashtra to make
special provision for the advancement of
the Maratha community, which is certainly
socially and educationally backward class
and ultimately that will enable the
provision for reservation of appointment
community in the services under the
236.   It is clear that the entire basis of the
Commission to exceed 50% limit is that since the
population of backward class is between 80% to 85%,
reservation to them within the ceiling 50% will be
injustice to them.
237.    We may revert back to paragraph 810 where
Indra    Sawhney     has     given    illustration    which
illustration    is    regarding    certain   extra-ordinary
situations. The exact words used in paragraph 810
“It might happen that in far flung and
remote areas the population inhabiting
those areas might, on account of their
being out of the main stream of national
life and in view of conditions peculiar to
and characteristical to them, need to be
relaxation in this strict rule may become
imperative. In doing so, extreme caution
is to be exercised and a special case made
out.”
238.   Shri Rohtagi had submitted that the test laid
down  in   paragraph    810   is   only geographical   test
which was an illustration. It is true that in Indra
Sawhney     the   expression    used  was   “far flung  and
remote areas” but the social test which was a part
of   the    same    sentence     stated   “the   population
inhabiting those areas might, on account of their
being out of the main stream of national life and in
view of conditions peculiar to and characteristical
to   them”.  Thus,  one  of  the  social  conditions  in
paragraph 810 is that being within the main stream
of   National  Life,  the   case  of  Maratha   does not
satisfy the extra-ordinary situations as indicated
in paragraph 810 of Indra Sawhney .         The Marathas
are in the main stream of the National Life. It is
not   even  disputed   that  Marathas   are  politically
dominant caste.
239.    This Court in several judgments has noticed
that what can be the extra-ordinary situations as
contemplated in paragraph 810 in few other cases. We
have referred above the three-Judge Bench judgment
in Union of India and others vs. Rakesh Kumar and
others, (2010) 4 SCC 50, where three-Judge Bench
held that exceptional case of 50% ceiling can be in
regard to Panchayats in scheduled areas. The above
three-Judge    Bench   has   also   been   approved  and
reiterated by the Constitution Bench of this Court
in K.K. Krishnamurthi (supra). In the above cases
this   Court   was    examining     the   reservation    in
Panchayats.   In   the   context    of  Part   IX   of  the
Constitution, 50% ceiling principle was applied but
exception was noticed.
240.   In the above context, we may also notice the
paragraph 163 of the impugned judgment of the High
Court where the High Court has also come to the
conclusion that the Maratha has made out a case of
extra-ordinary    situation    within    the   meaning   of
paragraph  610   of   Indra   Sawhney's   case.   The  High
Court in paragraph 163 of judgment made following
“163...We would curiously refer to the
reports, which would disclose that it is
for the first time in form of Gaikwad
Commission the quantifiable data has been
collected and in terms of Nagaraj, the
representation are two key factors which
would permit exceeding of reservation of
50% by the State. ….”
241.  The High Court has endorsed the opinion of the
Commission   that   when   the   population   of   backward
class is 85% if they would get only 50%, it would
not  be  valid.    In   paragraph    165  of   the  impugned
judgment following is the opinion of the High Court:
disclosed their caste have been shown to
be   15.7%.      The    Commission      therefore
concludes that though the survey report
percentage of existing backward classes,
population. The Commission has also made
a reference to the census of the year
1872 which calculates the population of
Shudras and the census report of 1872
from which the position emerge that more
than 80% population was found backward in
categorizes this as an extra-ordinary
situation since the majority of the
unequals are living with the minority of
the equals. The figures available on
disclose that the State population is
3,68,83,000 is the population of OBC
Empowerment, Government of India has
given the State wise percentage of OBCs
in India and for Maharashtra it is 33.8%
final.doc therefore deduced that the
population of Marathas is 30%. Therefore,
in terms of the population, if we look at
the figures then the situation which
population is of the backward classes and
backward and they get only a reservation
justice. When we speak of equality –
equality of status and opportunity, then
whether this disparity would be referred
to as achieving equality is the moot
question. The situation of extra-ordinary
circumstances as set out though by way of
illustration in Indra Sawhney would thus
get attracted and the theme of the Indian
Constitution to achieve equality can be
attained. Once we have accepted that the
Maratha community is a backward class,
then it is imperative on the part of the
State to uplift the said community and if
the State does so, and in extra ordinary
circumstances, exceed the limit of 50%,
we feel that this is an extra ordinary
situation to cross the limit of 50%.”
242.      Again at page 453 of the judgment, the High
Court reiterated that extra-ordinary situations have
been culled out by the report since backward class
is 85%, Maratha being 30%.      Treating above to be
extra-ordinary situation following observations have
“170...The extra-ordinary situations
have been culled out as the report has
declared that Maratha community comprise
30% of the population of the State and
this figure is derived on the basis of
quantifiable   data.   The   extra-ordinary
situation is therefore carved out for
awarding an adequate representation to the
Maratha community who is now declared
socially, educationally and economically
backward. Based on the population of 30%,
Commission has arrived at a conclusion
population which is entitled for the
constitutional benefits and advantages as
listed under Article 15(4) and Article
16(4) would be around 85% and this is a
compelling      extra-ordinary      situation
demanding extra-ordinary solution within
the constitutional framework. ...”
243.    From the above, it is clear that both the
Commission and the High Court treated the extra-
ordinary situations with regard to exceeding 50% for
granting separate reservation to Maratha, the fact
that   population   of   backward   class   is  85%  and
reservation   limit   is  only  50%.  The  above  extra-
ordinary circumstances as opined by the Commission
and approved by the High Court is not extra-ordinary
situation as referred to in paragraph 810 of Indra
Sawhney judgment. The Marathas are dominant forward
class and are in the main stream of National life.
The   above   situation    is  not   an   extra-ordinary
situation contemplated by Indra Sawhney judgment and
both Commission and the High Court fell in error in
accepting the above circumstances as extra-ordinary
circumstance for exceeding the 50 % limit. At this
stage,  we  may  notice  that what  was  said  by  Dr.
Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly debates dated
30.11.1948   while   debating   draft   Article   10/3
(Article 16(4) of the Constitution). Dr. Ambedkar by
“Supposing, for instance, we were to
communities who have not been so far
employed in the public services to the
fullest extent,what would really happen
is, we shall be completely destroying the
first proposition upon which we are all
agreed, namely, that there shall be an
equality of opportunity. Let me give an
illustration. Supposing, for instance,
reservations were made for a community or
a collection of communities, the total of
which came to something like 70 per cent.
of the total posts under the State and
only 30 per cent. are retained as the
unreserved. Could anybody say that the
reservation of 30 per cent. As open to
general competition would be satisfactory
from the point of view of giving effect to
the first principle, namely, that there
shall be equality of opportunity? It
cannot be in my judgment. Therefore the
seats to be reserved, if the reservation
is to be consistent with sub-clause (1) of
Article 10, must be confined to a minority
of seats. It is then only that the first
principle could find its place in the
Constitution and effective in operation.”
244. The illustration given by Dr. Ambedkar that
supposing 70% posts are reserved and 30% may retain
as unreserved, can anybody say that 30% as open to
general competition would be satisfactory from point
of view of giving effect to the first principle of
equality, the answer given by Dr. Ambedkar was in
negative.    Thus,   Constituent    Assembly   by   giving
illustration has already disapproved principle which
is   now  propounded   by  the  High   Court.   We  cannot
approve the view of the High court based on the same
view taken by the Commission.
245.   In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of
the   considered   opinion   that  neither   the   Gaikwad
Commission's report nor the judgment of the High
Court has made out an extra-ordinary situation in
the case of Maratha where ceiling of 50% can be
exceeded.   We   have   already   noticed   the   relevant
discussion and conclusion of the Commission in the
above regard and we have found that the conclusions
of the Commission are unsustainable. We, thus, hold
that there is no case of extra-ordinary situation
for exceeding the ceiling limit of 50% for grant of
reservation to Maratha over and above 50% ceiling of
reservation.
(10)Whether the Act, 2018, as amended in 2019
granting     separate    reservation    for   Maratha
Community by exceeding ceiling of 50 percent
makes out exceptional circumstances as per the
246.   We have noticed above the provisions of the
2018 Act. In Section 2(j), the Maratha Community has
been declared and included in the educationally and
socially backward category and under Section 4(1),
16 percent (12 percent as per 2019 Amendment Act) of
the    total    seats    in   educational    institutions
including    private   educational   institutions,  other
than minority educational institutions are reserved
and 16 percent (13 percent as amended by 2019 Act)
of total appointment in direct recruitment in public
services and posts. Section 3(4) has further made it
clear   that   nothing   in the   Act  shall  effect  the
reservation provided to other backward classes under
2001 Act and 2006 Act. The legislative history of
2018 enactment is necessary to be noticed to find
out the objects and reasons for the enactment.
247.  We  have   noted   in  detail  various   reports  of
National   Backward    commissions    as  well   as  State
Backward Commissions which have repeatedly rejected
the  claim   of   Maratha   to   be   included   in  Other
Backward    Communities.     After   receipt    of   Bapat
Commission    Report   which   rejected    the   claim  of
Maratha  to   be  Other   Backward   Classes,   the  State
Government     appointed    a    Committee     under   the
chairmanship of a sitting Minister i.e. Narayan Rane
Committee.   On   the   basis  of   said  Rane   Committee
report, the State enacted 2014, Act, constitutional
validity of which Act was challenged in the High
Court and was stayed by the High Court vide its
order dated 07.04.2015. During pendency of the writ
petition, the State Government made a reference to
the Maharashtra Backward Class Commission in June,
2017 and one of the term of the Reference was to the
circumstances and extraordinary situations
reservation in the contemporary scenario.”
submitted    its   report   in  15.11.2018,     which  report
became the basis for 2018 enactment.
249. The Statements of objects and reasons for 2018
enactment    have   been   published   in   the   Maharashtra
Government Gazette dated 29.11.2018 publishing the
bill No. 78(LXXVIII) of 2018. Paragraph 6 of the
Statement of object and reasons notices the earlier
2014 Act and the stay by the High Court and further
reference    to   the  Commission.   Paragraph     6  of  the
Statement of objects and reasons is as follows:-
“6. Thereafter, the Maharashtra State
Reservation (of seats for admission in
educational institutions in the State and
for appointments or posts in the public
Educationally       and    Socially      Backward
Category (ESBC) Act, 2014 (Mah.I of 2015),
for converting the said Ordinance into an
Act of the State Legislature, was enacted
Constitutional validity of the said Act
has been challenged before the Hon’ble
High Court. The Hon’ble High Court has
stayed the implementation of the said Act
on 7th April, 2015.
Thereafter, the State Government has
requested the Maharashtra Backward Classes
(ii)    Define the exceptional circum-
(iv)    Determine the representation of
(v)     Ascertain the proportion of the
able under various sources.”
250.   Paragraph 8 of the Statement of objects and
reasons   further    states   that  the   Commission   has
submitted   its   report  to   the  State   Government  on
15.11.2018. Paragraph 8 refers to the conclusion and
the findings of the Commission. The conclusions and
findings   of  the   Commission   have  been   noticed  in
paragraph 8 of the Statement of Objects and reasons.
251.   The report of the Maharashtra State Backward
Class Commission dated 15.11.2018 became the basis
for  granting   separate    reservation   to  the  Maratha
community by exceeding the 50 percent ceiling limit.
We have already in detail has dealt the report of
the   Commission      especially    Chapter     10   where
Commission dealt with extraordinary situation.
252. The Government after considering the report,
its  conclusion     and  findings   and   recommendations
formed the opinion for giving separate reservation
to   the    Maratha     community    as    socially    and
educationally backward classes (SEBC). Paragraph 9
of   the  statement   of  objects    and  reasons  is as
“9. The Government of Maharashtra has
considered     the   report,      conclusions,
findings and recommendations of the said
Commission. On the basis of the exhaustive
study of the said Commission on various
aspects   regarding    the    Marathas,   like
public    employment,     education,    social
status,    economical    status,    ratio   of
population, living conditions, small size
of land holdings by families, percentage
of suicide of farmers in the State, type
of works done for living, migration of
families, etc., analysed by data, the
(a) The Maratha Community is socially
(b) Having regard to the exceptional
exceptional circumstances, which
(c) It is expedient to provide for 16
tional institutions, is concerned
cational institutions referred to
(f) By providing reservation to the
Maratha Community, the efficiency
above purposes.
proceed on their own.”
253. The statement and object of the bill clearly
indicates that the State has formed the opinion on
the basis of the report of the Commissions and had
accepted the reasons given by the Commission holding
that extraordinary circumstances for exceeding the
ceiling limit is made out. We have already in detail
analyze and noticed the report of the Commission and
have held that no extraordinary circumstances have
been made out on the basis of reasoning given in the
report.    While     the      foundation       itself   is
unsustainable, the formation of opinion by the State
Government  to   grant   separate   reservation     to the
Marathas    exceeding       50    percent       limit   is
unsustainable.
254. It is well settled that all legislative Act and
executive acts of the Government have to comply with
the Fundamental Rights. The State’s legislative or
any   executive   action     passed    in    violation  of
Fundamental    Rights    is     ultra     vires    to  the
Constitution.   The   50   percent    ceiling    limit for
reservation laid down by Indra Sawhney case is on
the basis of principle of equality as enshrined in
Article 16 of the Constitution. In paragraph 808,
14 and 16 is equality and equality of
opportunity and that Clause (4) of Article
16 is but a means of achieving the very
same objective. Clause (4) is a special
provision - though not an exception to
Clause (1). Both the provisions have to be
harmonised keeping in mind the fact that
both are but the restatements of the
principle of equality enshrined in Article
14. The   provision     under Article    16(4)
- conceived in the interest of certain
sections of society - should be balanced
16 which is a guarantee held out to every
citizen and to the entire society. It is
relevant to point out that Dr. Ambedkar
himself contemplated reservation being
"confined to a minority of seats" (See his
speech in Constituent Assembly, set out in
Constituent Assembly suggested otherwise.
It is, thus clear that reservation of a
majority of seats was never envisaged by
the founding fathers. Nor are we satisfied
that the present context requires us to
depart from that concept.”
255. The Constitution Bench of this Court in        M.
Nagaraj(Supra) has reiterated that ceiling limit on
reservation    fixed   at  50   percent   is  to  preserve
equality. In paragraphs 111 and 114, following was
“111. The petitioners submitted that
equality has been recognized to be a basic
feature of our Constitution. To preserve
equality, a balance was struck in Indra
Sawhney so as to ensure that the basic
remains intact and at the same time social
Constitution, stood achieved. In order to
balance and structure the equality, a
ceiling limit on reservation was fixed at
50% of the cadre strength; reservation was
confined to initial recruitment and was
not extended to promotion...
114. In Indra Sawhney, the equality
which was protected by the rule of 50%,
was by balancing the rights of the general
category vis-à-vis the rights of BCs en
bloc consisting of OBCs, SCs and STs...”
256.    We    have    found    that    no    extraordinary
circumstances    were   made  out  in   granting  separate
reservation of Maratha Community by exceeding the 50
percent ceiling limit of reservation. The Act, 2018
violates the principle of equality as enshrined in
Article 16. The exceeding of ceiling limit without
there  being   any   exceptional   circumstances   clearly
violates Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution which
makes the enactment ultra vires.
257.   We thus conclude that the Act, 2018 as amended
in 2019, granting separate reservation for Maratha
community    has   not   made   out   any   exceptional
circumstances to exceed the ceiling of 50 percent
reservation.
(11)Gaikwad Commission Report – a scrutiny
258.      Shri   Pradeep   Sancheti,   learned    senior
counsel, appearing for the appellant elaborating his
submissions has questioned the Gaikwad Commission's
Report on numerous grounds. Shri Patwalia, learned
senior    counsel,   appearing   for   the    State   of
Maharashtra has refuted the challenge.
259.    Shri Sancheti submits that judicial scrutiny
of a quantifiable data claimed by the State is an
essential constitutional safeguard. He submits that
though the Court has to look into the report with
judicial     deference   but    judicial    review    is
permissible    on  several   counts.  A   report   which
violates the constitutional principle and rule of
law can very well be interfered with in exercise of
judicial review. Shri Sancheti submits that three
National   Backward   Classes    Commissions   as well  as
three   State  Backward    Classes   Commissions  for  the
last 60 years have considered the claim of Marathas
to be included in Other Backward Community which
claim was repeatedly negatived. He submits that the
report of National Backward Classes Commissions and
State Backward Classes Commissions could not have
been ignored by Gaikward Commission in the manner it
has dealt with the earlier reports. Shri Sancheti
submits    that     the    National    Backward    Classes
Commission as well as the State Backward Classes
Commission considered the contemporaneous data and
came to a conclusion at a particular time. Gaikward
Commission    which   was   appointed   in   2017  had  no
jurisdiction to pronounce that Maratha was backward
community from the beginning and all earlier reports
are   faulty.   Shri    Sancheti   submits   that  Maratha
community is a most dominant community in the State
of Maharashtra weilding substantial political power.
The  majority   of   Legislature    belongs   to  Maratha
community,   out   of   19   Chief   Ministers    of  the
Maharashtra   State,   13  Chief   Ministers   were  from
Maratha community. Out of 25 Medical Colleges in
Maharashtra 17 Medical Colleges are founded/owned by
the people belonging to Maratha community. In 24 of
the  31   District    Central   Cooperative    Banks  are
occupied by the persons from Martha community. Out
of the functioning 161 Cooperative Sugar Factories
in Maharashtra, in 86 Sugar Factories persons from
Maratha community are the Chairman.       The Class which
is politically so dominant, cannot be said to be
suffering from social backwardness.
260. Shri Sancheti further submits that survey by
the  Commission,     data   result,    analysis   therein
suffers  from   various   inherent   flaws.   The  sample
survey conducted by the Commission is unscientific
and cannot be taken as respective sample. The sample
size is very small. Only 950 persons were surveyed
from Urban areas. He submits that Commission was
loaded  with    members    belonging    to   the  Maratha
community. The Agency for survey (Data collections)
was selected without tendering process. Out of five
organisations   that  conducted     the  survey   two  were
headed  by   persons    from   Maratha     community.   The
Maratha  community   has   adequate     representation   in
public  service   which   fact   is   apparent  from   data
collected by the Commission itself. On the basis of
data  collection   by   the  Commission     no  conclusion
could have been arrived that Maratha community is
not adequately represented in services in the State.
261.     Shri Patwalia refuting the submissions of
the learned counsel for the appellant submits that
Gaikwad   Commission     has    considered     conclusions
arrived by all earlier Commissions and thereafter it
had recorded its conclusion. The Commission before
proceeding   further   has   laid    down   procedure   for
investigation.   The  Commission     decided   to   conduct
survey as to collect information in respect of the
social and educational backwardness. The Commission
has surveyed to collect information of all families
in two villages in each District and the Commission
decided  to   collect   information     by  selecting   one
Municipal Corporation and one Municipal Council from
each of six regions of the State of Maharashtra. For
the purpose of sample survey five different Agencies
have been nominated. The Commission also conducted
public    hearing,    collected    representations    from
persons, numbering 195174. Out of representations,
193651   persons   are   in  favour   of  reservation   to
Maratha whereas 1523 were in favour of reservation
of    Maratha     community    by    creating    separate
percentage. The Commission also recorded evidence,
obtained information from the Government departments
and   other   organisations,    Universities   and   after
fixing parameters allocated 10 marks for socially
backward class, 8 marks out of 25 marks has been
allocated for educational backwardness, 7 marks to
the economically backward class and after following
the marking system held that Maratha community has
obtained more that 12.5 marks and has satisfied that
it   is   socially,    educationally    and  economically
backward class. 784 resolutions of Gram Panchayats
were in favour of granting reservation of OBC.          It
is   submitted   that   the  representation   of   Maratha
community in the public services is not equivalent
to their population which is 30%. Hence, they were
entitled   to   separate   reservation   to   make   their
representation as per their population.
262.     Shri Patwalia further submits that scope of
judicial review of a report of the Commission is too
limited. This Court shall not substitute its opinion
in place of the opinion arrived by the Commission.
He submits that parameters of judicial review have
been laid down in Indra Sawhney's case. The Court
shall not sit in appeal over the opinion of experts.
The report of Gaikwad Commission is based on sample
study of Maratha community. It is on the basis of
the  report   of  the   Gaikwad  Commission   that   State
Government formed opinion that Maratha community is
a  socially   and   educationally   backward   class   and
deserves a separate reservation in recognition of
their   legitimate     claim.   Inclusion    of    Maratha
community in already existing OBC community for whom
19% reservation is allowed shall have adverse effect
on the OBC who are already enjoying the reservation,
hence    decision   was   taken   to  grant   separate
reservation.
263.      We have considered the submissions of the
parties    and  perused the records.   Before
proceeding further, we need to notice the parameters
of judicial review in such cases.
264.    We may first notice the Constitution Bench
judgment of this Court in M.R. Balaji vs. The State
of Mysore and others, AIR (1963) SC 649. In the
above  case,   this  Court  had occasion  to  consider
Nagan Gowda Committee which has submitted a report
in 1961 and made a recommendation for reservation.
In pursuance of the report, the State of Mysore had
issued an order dated 31.07.1961 deciding to reserve
15% seats for Scheduled Castes and 3% for Scheduled
Tribes and 50% for backward class totaling to 68% of
seats available for admission to the Engineering and
Medical Colleges and to other technical institutions
in the State. The Constitution Bench elaborated the
extent of judicial review to an executive action. In
paragraph 35 of the judgment, the Constitution Bench
“35. The petitioners contend that having
regard to the infirmities in the impugned
order, action of the State in issuing the
Constitutional power conferred on the
State by Article 15(4). This argument is
well-founded, and must be upheld. When it
is said about an executive action that it
is a fraud on the Constitution, it does
not necessarily mean that the action is
actuated by mala fides. An executive
action which is patently and plainly
outside the limits of the constitutional
authority conferred on the State in that
behalf is struck down as being ultra vires
the State's authority. If, on the other
hand, the executive action does not
patently    or    overtly    transgress    the
Constitution, but the transgression is
covert or latent, the said action is
relevant constitutional power. It is in
this connection that courts often consider
the substance of the matter and not its
form and in ascertaining the substance of
the matter, the appearance or the cloak,
or the veil of the executive action is
carefully scrutinized and if it appears
that notwithstanding the appearance, the
cloak or the veil of the executive action,
transgressed,    the   impugned    action   is
264(a). From the above, it is clear that what was
emphasised by the Court is that it is the substance
of the matter which has to be examined and not its
form, appearance, or the cloak, or the veil of the
executive action has to be carefully scrutinised.
265.     The next judgment which we need to notice is
the judgment of this Court in The State of Andhra
Pradesh and others vs. U.S.V. Balram, etc., (1972) 1
SCC 660. The above case is also on basis of the
Commission's report. The Commission for the backward
classes in the State of Andhra Pradesh appointed by
the State Government submitted a report. The High
Court held the enumeration of the backward classes
as well as reservation invalid. The State of Andhra
Pradesh filed the appeal. The grounds of challenge
were noticed in Paragraph 77 of the judgment. In
paragraph 83-A of the judgment this Court observed:
that  the  question  to be  answered  is whether  the
materials relied in the report are not adequate or
sufficient to support its conclusion. Following have
"83-A. … But, in our opinion, the question
is whether on the materials collected by
the Commission and referred to in its
materials are not adequate or sufficient
to support its conclusion that the persons
mentioned in the list as Backward Classes
backward? ....
...Therefore, the proper approach, in our
opinion, should be to see whether the
relevant data and materials referred to in
the report of the Commission justify its
conclusions. ….”
266.      Thus, one of the parameters of scrutiny of a
Commission's report is that whether on the basis of
data and materials referred to in the report whether
conclusions arrived by the Commission are justified.
267.      In  Indra   Sawhney,  one   of  the   questions
framed   by  the   Constitution   Bench  to   answer  was
question No.9, which is to the following fact:
review is restricted with regard to the
identification of Backward Classes and the
percentage of reservations made for such
classes    to    a   demonstrably    perverse
unreasonable percentage?”
268.     In paragraph 842 of Indra Sawhney following
question that there is no particular or
special standard of judicial scrutiny in
matters arising under Article 16(4) or for
that matter, under Article 15(4). The
extent and scope of judicial scrutiny
depends upon the nature of the subject-
matter, the nature of the right affected,
constitutional provisions applicable and
so on. The acts and orders of the State
made under Article 16(4) do not enjoy any
particular kind of immunity. At the same
normally extend due deference to the
judgment and discretion of the executive —
a co-equal wing — in these matters. .....”
269.     In   paragraph   798,   it  was  held   by  the
Constitution   Bench  in   Indra  Sawhney  that  opinion
formed with respect to grant of reservation is not
beyond     judicial     scrutiny     altogether.     The
Constitution Bench referred to an earlier judgment
of this Court in Barium Chemicals v. Company Law
Board,   AIR   1967  SC   295.   In  the  above   regard
paragraph 798 is extracted for ready reference:
“798. …It does not, however, mean that
the opinion formed is beyond judicial
scrutiny altogether. The scope and reach
of judicial scrutiny in matters within
subjective satisfaction of the executive
are well and extensively stated in Barium
Chemicals v. Company Law Board [1966 Supp
SCR 311 : AIR 1967 SC 295] which need not
be repeated here. Suffice it to mention
that the said principles apply equally in
the case of a constitutional provision
like Article 16(4) which expressly places
representation)     within    the   subjective
judgment of the State/executive.”
270.      Indra    Sawhney   having    referred   to   the
judgment of this Court in Barium Chemicals (supra)
for the scope and reach of judicial scrutiny. We
need   to   refer    the   test   enunciated   in   Barium
Chemicals.     The    Constitution    Bench   in    Barium
Chemicals had occasion to consider the expression
“if   in   the   opinion   of   the   Central   Government
occurring in Section 237 of Companies Act, 1956”.
Justice Hidayatullah laid down that no doubt the
formation of opinion is subjective but the existence
of the circumstances relevant to the inference as
the sine quo non for action must be demonstrable.
Following observations were made in paragraph 27:
“27. …No doubt the formation of opinion      is
circumstances relevant to the inference      as
demonstrable. If the action is questioned
on the ground that no circumstances
contemplated by the section exists, the
action might be exposed to interference
unless the existence of the circumstances
is made out. As my brother Shelat has put
“It is not reasonable to say that the
clause permitted the Government to say
circumstances which it thinks exist….”
Since the existence of “circumstances”
is a condition fundamental to the making
circumstances, if questioned, has to be
proved at least prima facie.”
271.   Justice Shelat with whom Justice Hidayatullah
has agreed in paragraph 63 laid down following:
“63. .....Therefore, the words, "reason to
believe" or "in the opinion of" do not
always lead to the construction that the
process   of    entertaining  "reason   to
believe" or "the opinion" is an altogether
subjective process not lending itself even
to a limited scrutiny by the court that
such "a reason to believe" or "opinion"
was not formed on relevant facts or within
the limits or as Lord Redcliff and Lord
Reid called the restraints of the statute
as an alternative safeguard to rules of
natural justice where the function is
administrative.”
272.      Dr. Rajiv Dhavan, learned senior counsel,
during    his   submission   has   contended    that   Indra
Sawhney in its judgment has relied on a very weak
test.     He    contended    that    the    constitutional
reservations are required to be subjected to strict
scrutiny tests.
273.      We may also notice two-Judge Bench judgment
of this Court in B.K. Pavitra and others vs. Union
of India and others, (2019) 16 SCC 129, where this
Court had after referring to earlier judgment laid
down that Committee/commission has carried out an
exercise    for   collecting   data,  the  Court   must   be
circumspect     in  exercising   the   power   of  judicial
review    to   re-evaluate    the   factual   material    on
record.
274.      We may also notice a recent judgment of this
Court   in   Mukesh   Kumar  and   another   vs.  State   of
Uttarakhand and others, (2020) 3 SCC 1, in which one
of   us  Justice   L.  Nageswara   Rao  speaking    for  the
Bench laid down following in paragraph 13:
“13. .....The Court should show due
deference to the opinion of the State
which does not, however, mean that the
opinion formed is beyond judicial scrutiny
judicial scrutiny in matters within the
subjective satisfaction of the executive
are extensively stated in Barium Chemicals
Chemicals Ltd. v. Company Law Board, AIR
reiterated.”
275.      The grant of reservation under Article 15(4)
or 16(4) either by an executive order of a State or
legislative    measures    are   Constitutional     measures
which are contemplated to fulfill the principle of
equality. The measures taken under Article 15(4) and
16(4)   thus,   can   be  examined    as   to  whether  they
violate    any    constitutional      principle,    are   in
conformity with the rights under Article 14, 15 and
16 of the Constitution. The scrutiny of measures
taken by the State either executive or legislative,
thus,   has   to    pass   test   of   the    constitutional
scrutiny. It is true that the Court has to look into
the   report   of   the  Commission     or   Committee  with
deference but     scrutiny to the extent as to whether
any constitutional principle has been violated or
any constitutional requirement has not been taken
into   consideration   is  fully  permissible.   As   laid
down in V. Balram case (supra) the judicial scrutiny
is also permissible as to whether from the material
collected    by   the   Commission   or   committee    the
conclusion on which the Commission has arrived is
permissible and reasonable. We are conscious of the
limitation on the Court's scrutiny regarding factual
data   and   materials   collected  by   the   Court.   We
without    doubting   the   manner   and   procedure    of
collecting the data shall proceed to examine the
report on the strength of facts, materials, and data
collected by the Commission.
(12)Whether     the   data   of   Marathas    in   public
employment as found out by Gaikwad Commission
makes out cases for grant of reservation under
Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India to
276.   The  reservation   under  Article   16(4)  of   the
Constitution is enabling power of the State to make
any   provision   for  reservation   of  appointment    or
posts in favour of other backward class of citizens
who in the opinion of the State is not adequately
represented in the services under the State. The
conditions   precedent    for  exercise  of   power   under
Article   16(4)  is  that   the  backward   class   is  not
adequately   represented    in  the  services   under   the
277. The Constitution Bench of this Court in Indra
Sawhney while elaborating on Article 16(4) has held
that clause (4) of Article 16 speaks of adequate
representation and not proportionate representation
representation     and    not   proportionate
representation.     Adequate   representation
representation. Principle of proportionate
representation is accepted only in Article
330 and 332 of the Constitution and that
too for a limited period. These articles
speak of reservation of seats in Lok Sabha
and the State legislatures in favour of
Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes
proportionate to their population, but
they are only temporary and special
provisions. It is therefore not possible
to accept the theory of proportionate
representation though the proportion of
population of backward classes to the
total    population    would    certainly    be
relevant...”
278. The objective behind clause (4) of Article 16
is sharing the power by those backward classes of
the society who had no opportunities in the past to
be part of the State services or to share the power
of   the  State.   Indra   Sawhney  has   noted  the  above
objective    in   paragraph   694  of   the   judgment  (by
Justice Jeevan Reddy), which is to the following
amply clear that the objective behind
clause (4) of Article 16 was the sharing
of State power. The State power which was
almost exclusively monopolized by the
upper castes i.e., a few communities, was
now sought to be made broad-based. The
backward communities who were till then
kept out of apparatus of power, were
sought to be inducted there into and since
that was not practicable in the normal
course, a special provision was made to
effectuate the said objective. In short,
the objective behind Article 16(4) is
empowerment    of   the   deprived    backward
communities – to give them a share in the
administrative     apparatus    and    in   the
governance of the community.”
279.    The  State,   when   provides   reservation   under
Article 16(4) by executive action or by legislation,
condition precedent, that the backward class is not
adequately   represented    in  the   service   has   to be
fulfilled.   The    Constitution    Bench    in   M.Nagaraj
(Supra) has laid down following in paragraph 102:-
“102...If the appropriate Government
enacts a law providing for reservation
without keeping in mind the parameters in
Article 16(4) and Article 335 then this
Court will certainly set aside and strike
down such legislation...”
280. Further in paragraph 107, M.Nagaraj laid down
mentioned    in    Article    16(4),    namely,
backwardness, inadequacy and efficiency of
administration are retained in Articles
16(4-A)    and    16(4-B)     as    controlling
constitutional      invalidity      to     these
enabling provisions. However, when the
State fails to identify and implement the
controlling factors then excessiveness
comes in, which is to be decided on the
facts of each case. In a given case, where
discrimination, this Court has to examine
individual cases and decide the matter in
accordance with law. This is the theory of
“guided power”. We may once again repeat
that equality is not violated by mere
conferment of power but it is breached by
conferred.”
281. The word ‘adequate’ is a relative term used in
relation to representation of different caste and
communities in public employment. The objective of
Article 16(4) is that backward class should also be
put in main stream and they are to be enabled to
share power of the State by affirmative action. To
be   part  of   public   service,  as   accepted    by  the
Society of today, is to attain social status and
play a role in governance. The governance of the
State is through service personnel who play a key
role    in   implementing    government   policies,     its
obligation and duties. The State for exercising its
enabling power to grant reservation under Article
16(4) has to identify inadequacy in representation
of backward class who is not adequately represented.
For    finding    out   adequate   representation,      the
representation     of    backward   class    has    to   be
contrasted    with   representation   of   other    classes
including forward classes. It is a relative term
made   in  reference    to  representation    of   backward
class,    other   caste    and  communities     in   public
services.    The   Maratha     community    is    only   one
community among the numerous castes and communities
in the State of Maharashtra. The principal caste and
communities in the State of Maharashtra consists of
Scheduled     Castes/Scheduled      Tribes,     de-notified
tribes,    nomadic   tribes    (B,   C  and   D),    special
backward    category    and    other   backward     classes,
general categories and the minorities.
282. A large number of castes and communities are
included in the above class of castes. We may refer
to   number   of  caste   and   communities    included   in
different groups. Few details are on the record:
SC(59), ST(47) and OBC(348).
283.   The  above  details    indicate  that    in  a  rough
estimate in the State of Maharashtra, there are more
than 500 castes and communities which are living in
the State and earning their livelihood.
which include Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe to
have   representation   in   the   public   services.   The
State cannot take any measure which violates the
balance.    The  expression    ‘inadequacy’    has   to  be
understood in above manner.
285.  Now   we  proceed  to   look   into  the  report   of
Gaikwad Commission which has separately in detail in
Chapter IX dealt with the subject “inadequacy of
Marathas in the services under the State.”
286.   The   Commission  in   paragraph   214(b)    of  the
“214(b). The information regarding
recruitment status of all the Reserved
services under the State has been sought
from the State Government and other state
agencies...”
287.    The   Commission    was   well    aware    of   the
Constitutional conditions stipulated to be complied
by the State for reserving the posts in favour of
backward class of citizens which is clear from what
has been stated in paragraph 215 which for ready
conditions stipulated to be compiled by
State for reserving the posts in favour of
any Backward Class of Citizens in the
Public Services under or controlled by the
negotiable by the judicial pronouncement
services under the State.
ii) The total reservation should not
quantifiable data.
iii) Such reservation should be con-
tion.”
in Central services namely IAS, IPS, IFS and Table C
deals with position of employees and officers in
Mantralaya Cadre. The tables A and C enumerated the
details    grade    wise    from   Grade-A    to   Grade-D.    We
proceed to examine the issue on the basis of facts
and figures compiled by the Commission obtained from
State   and     other     sources.   The     figures   compiled
relates as on 01.08.2018. Figures having obtained
from the State, there is no question of doubting the
facts and figures compiled by the Commission.
289. Table A is part of paragraph 219 of the report.
We need to extract entire table A for appreciating
the question.
Government/Public Services/PRIs/ULBs in                the
No  ad  nc   st   ant   st   st  ts   st   st   st  st  st  st   st st
o on   fi   sts   nc   ll  led  fi   fi   fi  fi  fi  fi   fi fi
ad 53 19 42   66 04 (11.15   2    2   6    3(1 (1. 0(5 4(2.
e  2  0       9  8  6%) (8.1 (3. ((1. (1. .66  09% .27 78%)
ad 42 50 21   52 19  7    38  80   76  93   35 3(1 6(7 ( 1.
ad 24 34 003  85 33  224  21  15   14  13   96 77  196   35
ad 13 95 815  72 59  87   36  28   71  88   48 79  99 (2.
ta 20 91 081  30 22  989  33  23   21  53   83  38 971 901
290. The relevant figures pertaining to posts filled
as on 01.08.2018, includes posts filled from open
category, posts filled from Maratha classes from out
of open category posts, posts filled from SCs, posts
filled from STs, posts filled from Vimukt Jati(VJA),
posts filled from Nomadic Tribes NT-B, posts filled
from Nomadic Tribes NT-C,NT-D and posts filled from
the backward classes (OBC) and posts filled from
special  backward    classes(SBC).    The  above  figures
correctly represent the representation of different
classes in public services.
291. Now, we take the representation of Marathas
grade wise as reflected by Table A.
292.  Posts   filled   are  49,190   out  of  which  open
category  posts   are   28,048  and   posts  filled  from
Maratha  classes   are   9,321.  The   Maratha  Community
obviously has been competing in the open category
and  has    obtained    the   post   as   open   category
candidates.     The Chart also mentioned below each
class the percentage against the column of posts
filled  from  Maratha    class,   percentage    11.16%   has
been mentioned. Similarly, different percentage has
been mentioned against all other classes. When we
take the total number of posts, posts filled for
open  category,  it   is   mentioned  as    28,048   out  of
which  Marathas   are  9,321.    When   we   calculate   the
percentage of Maratha representation out of the open
category filled post, percentage comes out to 33.23
percent. Thus, the correct percentage of Maratha out
of the open category post is 33.23 percent which
indicates  that  more    than  33  percent    of   the  open
category   post   has   been   bagged    by    Maratha.   In
Maharashtra    while    considering      the    status    of
reservation, we have noticed that 52 percent posts
are reserved for different categories and only 48
percent posts are available for open category. Out
of 48 percent posts available for open category,
Marathas have obtained 33.23 percent. The percentage
given by the Commission in below Maratha class i.e.
11.86% is obviously wrong and erroneous. The Maratha
who  have  been  competing    in   open   category    cannot
claim  any   post  in    the  reserved    category    of  52
percent. Thus, the representation has to be computed
taking into the seats of open category. Similarly,
while computing the percentage of Marathas in Grade
B, C and D, similar mistakes have been committed by
the Commission. In Grade-B, total posts filled from
open category were 31193 out of which Marathas were
9057,  percentage     of   which   comes   out    to   29.03
percent. In Grade-C, total posts filled from open
category were 4,13,381 out of which Marathas were
1,53,224, percentage of which comes out to 37.06
percent and for Grade-D, total posts filled form
open category were 99592 out of which Marathas were
36387,   percentage    of   which   comes   out   to   36.53
percent.
293.   A comparative chart of open category seats
which  are    filled,    number   of   posts   of    Maratha
community and percentage in the posts is as follows:
Grade       No. of open No.              of Percentage        of
category         filled    from Maratha in      open
posts filled    Maratha          category post.
294. The above representation of Marathas in public
services in Grade-A, B, C and D are adequate and
satisfactory. One community bagging such number of
posts in public services is a matter of pride for
the community and its representation in no manner
can be said to not adequate in public services. The
Constitutional pre-condition that backward class is
not  adequately     represented   is   not  fulfilled.   The
State Government has formed opinion on the basis of
the   above     figures    submitted     by    the   Gaikwad
Commission.    The   opinion   of   the   State   Government
being    based   on   the  report,    not   fulfilling   the
Constitutional requirement for granting reservation
to Maratha community becomes unsustainable.
295. Now we also look into Table B and C given in
paragraphs 220 and 224 are as follows:-
No   e   al     ts       a    tione ts        atha s          ts     ts     ts       ts      t       t       ts       O
v   san    d        a            Fill    cers Fille      Fill   Fill   Fill     Fill    Fill    d       fille    A
e                                Fro     pyin Fro        Fro    Fro    Fro      Fro     Fro     oth     fro
ory                                    A)              (N.
r ra     ctio    ts     ca    t      ts      filled   ts     ts     ts     s        s       s        ts      ts
. de     ned     fille  nt    Vac    Fill    from     Fill   Fill          fille            fille    Fill    fill
N        ts      in     Po    for    Fro     Mara     Fro    Fro    ed              ed      fro      Fro     fro
. rv             on           en     Op      Class    SCs    STs    m      m        fro     No       Oth     spe
s             201          ego    Cat     out of                 Vi No           No      dic      Bac     bac
ad             0              (15.    (10. (4. (2. 1.71     2.22  1.71  (10
ad  0     3    7              (17.    (11. (3. (1. (1.      (2.   (2.   (13.
ad  5     9    76             (15.    (9.   (3. (1. (1.     (1.   (1.   (9.
ad  6                         (16.    (20. (5. (2. (2.      (1.   (0.   (8.
296.      Table B contains all details including posts
filled from open category, posts filled from Maratha
officers.       Taking    the     post      of    IAS     in    the     open
category filled are 161. Maratha IAS officers are
25,   percentage       of   which     comes       to    15.52     percent.
Similarly,       in  IPS     out     of    140     filled     up    posts,
Marathas are 39, percentage of which comes to 27.85
percent and similarly, in IFS, out of 89, 16 were
Marathas,   percentage  of   which   comes   to  17.97
percent.
297. With regard to percentage mentioned in each
column, error has been committed by the Commission
in reflecting less percentage which is incorrect and
erroneous. Following is a tabular chart of posts
filled in open category, posts filled by Maratha and
Services   No. of open No.           of Percentage      of
category       filled   from Maratha in open
posts filled Maratha          category post.
298. Now, we come to Table C i.e. Mantralaya Cadres.
Table C also contains the details of posts filled
from open category and posts filled from Maratha
category in Grade-A, B, C and D. For example, Grade-
A posts filled from open category are 248 out of
which Marathas are 93, percentage of which comes out
to 37.5 percent.
299. Similarly, in Grade-B, posts filled from open
category   are  793   out  of   which  Marathas  are   415,
percentage of which comes to 52.33 percent.
300. For Grade-C, posts filled from open category
are 808 out of which Marathas are 421, percentage of
which comes to 52.10 percent.
301. For Grade-D, posts filled from open category
are 333, out of which 185 are Marathas, percentage
of which comes to 55.55 percent.
302.   The  tabular   chart   for  posts  filled  in   open
category, posts filled by Marathas and percentage is
Grade     No. of open No. of posts Percentage             of
category        filled    from Maratha in open
posts filled Maratha           category post.
303. All the three tables A, B and C and percentage
of Marathas who have competed from open category
make it abundantly clear that they are adequately
represented in the services. The Commission although
noted all the figures correctly in all the columns
but  committed    error  in   computing   the   percentage
adding posts available for open category as well as
posts   available   for  reserved    categories.   Maratha
cannot claim to compete for the reserved category
posts;   hence,  there   is  no   question  of   computing
their representation including the reserved category
posts.   The  representation    of  Marathas   has  to  be
against open category posts, hence, their percentage
has  to   be  determined   as  compared   to  total   open
category   filled   posts,  and   the  representation   of
Marathas in most of the Grades is above 30 percent.
This is the basic error committed by the Commission
in computing the percentage due to which it fell in
error in finding their representation in services
inadequate.
304. There is one more fundamental error which has
been committed by the Commission. The Constitution
pre-condition for providing reservation as mandated
by Article 16(4) is that the backward class is not
adequately represented in the public services. The
Commission labored under misconception that unless
Maratha community is not represented equivalent to
its proportion, it is not adequately represented. We
may notice what has been said by the Commission in
paragraph    219   while   recording    its   conclusion
emerging from the analysis of information contained
in   Table  A,B,C  and  D.  In   paragraph  219(c),  the
“219(C)...The obvious conclusion that
emerges from the above information is that
in none of the four grades the strength of
Maratha Class employees is touching the
proportion to their population in the
State which is based on various sources is
estimated at an average 30%. So also,
their presence in administration is more
at the lower grades of “C” and “D” and
have a comparatively lesser existence and
role in decision making levels of State
administration in “A” and “B” grades...”
305. Indra Sawhney has categorically held that what
is required by the State for providing reservation
under     Article    16(4)    is    not    proportionate
representation    but   adequate   representation.   The
Commission thus proceeds to examine the entitlement
under Article 16(4) on the concept of proportionate
representation     in  the   State   services   which  is   a
fundamental error committed by the Commission.
306. The Government committed an error in accepting
the recommendation without scrutinizing the report
with regard to correct percentage of representation
of    Marathas     in    services.    The    constitutional
precondition as mandated by Article 16(4) being not
fulfilled with regard to Maratha class, both the
Gaikwad     Commission’s      report   and    consequential
legislation    are   unsustainable.    We  thus   hold  that
Maratha class was not entitled for any reservation
under Article 16(4) and grant of reservation under
Article   16(4)    is  unconstitutional     and   cannot  be
sustained.
(13)Social and Educational Backwardness of Maratha
307.     We   have   noted   above   that   three   National
Backward     Classes    Commissions     and   three    State
Backward Classes Commissions considered the claim of
Maratha   community     to   be   included   in  the   other
backward community but all Commissions rejected such
claim   rather  they   were  held   to   be  belonging    to
forward   community.    The   first    National    Backward
Classes    Commission    on   30.03.1955,      i.e.,    Kaka
Kalelkar    Commission    did    not     include    Maratha
commission in the list of backward communities. The
"In Maharashtra, besides the Brahman it is
the Maratha who claimed to be the ruling
community in the villages and the Prabhu
that dominated all other communities.
308.       The   second    National     Backward    Classes
Commission, i.e., Mandal Commission in its report
included    Maratha    community     as    forward    Hindu
community.    The  National    Commission     on   Backward
Classes in the year 2000 elaborately examined the
claim of Maratha community to be included in other
backward   class.   The  entire   Commission     heard   the
claim of Maratha, including the members of State
Backward Classes Commission representing the claim
of Maratha community. The National Backward Classes
commission    held   that   Maratha    community     is   an
advanced community of the society and it cannot be
included with Kunbi under separate entity of its
own. We may extract paragraphs 18, 19 and 22 of the
Commission's   report  which   are  to   the  following
“18. A community with a history of such
origin and close association with the
ruling classes, a community, many of whose
members,   from   its   inception    enjoyed
important economic and political rights
and positions of power and influence and
eventually became rulers and members of
ruling classes at different levels cannot
in any way be thought to have suffered any
social disadvantages. The Bench is aware
that in what is identified as a ruling
class/caste, every member of it does not
rule, but the fact that those who rule
come from a distinct caste community
imparts a certain amount of prestige and
self-confidence even to those from the
same caste/community who personally belong
to the ruling functionaries and to the
totality of that caste/community. It is
significant to note that Marathas have
sought and received recognition of as of
Kshatriya Varna category and therefore
does not secure them status or caste
upgradation    Examples    are    Vanniakula
Kshatriya in Tamil Nadu, the adoption of
the umbrella name "Kshatriya" by all BCs
in Gujarat, Paundra- Kshatriya (an SC) in
West Bengal and so on. But no community
which is recognized generally, i.e. by the
rest of the society as of "Kshatriya"
category and correctly finds place in a BC
list.
19. The modern history of Maharashtra is
witness to the continued dominance of
Marathas in its society and polity as
evident from the fact, for example, that
in   the    post-Independence   period, the
community provided the largest number of
Chief Ministers. During the full Bench
hearing on 14.12.99, the Bench had put the
question to the representatives of the
Maratha Community as to why despite there
important Ministers in the State, some of
whom also became important Ministers in
the Centre, none of them got or moved to
get Marathas included in the list of BCs
is eloquent testimony not only of the fact
that Marathas are not a backward class but
also of the wisdom and objectivity of
these Chief Ministers. The only ground
raised by the representatives of the
community in support of their claim for
inclusion in the list of BCs what the fact
of the origin of Marathas from Kunbis and
the alleged use of the name Maratha by
some members of Kunbi caste in some areas
of the State. The Bench is of the view
that since there, undoubtedly, is a
distinct class/community Called "Maratha"
and since it is obviously an advanced
community in society and polity as already
noted, it cannot be included in the list
of Backward Classes. The Bench cannot
accept the claim of the representatives of
the community that many known Maratha
leaders including one whose name they
mentioned have got caste certificates as
"Kunbi" as a valid ground for inclusion of
Marathas in the list of BCs with Kunbis.
The Bench has no ground to believe that
any known Maratha leaders would have
sought such certificates, nor have those
who have made this allegations presented
any evidence in support of this claim. But
even if, for argument's sake, claim or
argument is it does not prove that Maratha
is the same as Kunbi or synonym of Kunbi.
Leaving aside the allegations made by some
of the representatives of the community,
the Bench is aware that some shortsighted
individuals belonging to different non-
backward castes unfortunately resort to
certificates and in the context of the
administrative system, elements are not
rare which entertain such requests and
certificates. This menace, like different
forms of corruption, has become more and
more threatening. In certain Advices, the
Commission has advised the Central and
State Governments how this menace could be
extirpated. But false caste-certificates
and false caste-identities based on them
cannot change the reality of caste-
identities as they occur in society."
position, the Bench finds that Maratha is
not a socially backward community but is a
socially     advanced     and     prestigious
community and therefore the Request for
Inclusion of "Maratha" in the Central List
of Backward Classes for Maharashtra along
with Kunbhi should be rejected. In fact
"Maratha" does not merit inclusion in the
Central list of Backward Classes for
Maharashtra either jointly with "Kunbhi"
or under a separate entity of it's own.”
309.    We may also refer now to the three State
Backward Classes Commissions appointed by the State.
In the year 1961, Deshmukh Committee appointed by
the State of Maharashtra did not include the Maratha
community in the list of backward communities. In
the year 2001, Khatri Commission rejected the demand
of   Maratha     to   be   included    in   backward    class
communities. On 25.07.2008, Bapat Commission in its
report    rejected    the   demand    to   include   Maratha
community in the other backward class communities by
majority.
310. After the Bapat Commission's report, the State
Government had appointed Rane Committee to be headed
by   a   Cabinet    Minister    who   collected    data   and
observed    that    Maratha   may   not   be   socially   and
educationally     backward    but   recommended    grant   of
reservation      as     educationally     and    financially
backward class. The National Commission or the State
Commission,    when    it  is  appointed    to  examine   the
claim of a particular community to be included or
excluded from a list of other backward classes, it
is to look into the contemporaneous data and fact.
The   State   to   inform   itself   of   the  status   of   a
particular     community     appoints    Commissions    or
Committees to take affirmative measures as ordained
by the constitutional provisions of Articles 15 and
16. The relevant is the data status of the community
as existing at the time of investigation and report.
311. This Court in Ram Singh and others vs. Union of
India, (2015) 4 SCC 697, has categorically laid down
in paragraph 49 that a decision which impacts the
rights   of  many  under   Articles   14  and  16  of  the
Constitution    must    be   taken   on   contemporaneous
inputs.   Following   observations   were   made  by  two-
Judge Bench of this Court in paragraph 49:
important as involved in the present case
which impacts the rights of many under
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution must
be taken on the basis of contemporaneous
inputs and not outdated and antiquated data.
In fact, under Section 11 of the Act revision
of the Central Lists is contemplated every
ten   years.   The   said   provision   further
illuminates   on    the   necessity   and   the
relevance of contemporaneous data to the
decision-making process.”
312. We fully endorse the above view of this Court.
Any study of Committee or Commission is with regard
to    present   status    since    object     is    to   take
affirmative actions in present or in future to help
the   particular   community.   Three   National     Backward
Classes Commissions reports as noted above in the
year 1955, 1980 and 2000, were the reports regarding
the status of the community as was found at the
relevant       time.     Similarly,         three       State
Committee/Commissions    in   the   year   1961,   2001   and
2008 also were reporting the status of Marathas at
the relevant time when the report was submitted. The
term of the reference of the Gaikwad Commission was
not to examine as to whether earlier reports of the
National    Commissions     for    Backward     Classes    or
Committee/Commissions of the State earlier in not
recommending    Maratha  to   be   included    in  OBC   were
correct or not. Terms of reference which is a part
of   the  report  clause   (1)   and  clause    (3)   clearly
indicate    that    the  Commission      was    to    collect
contemporaneous data. Quantifiable data collected by
the State which have been referred in the report
were of the data collected period after 2014. The
Commission’s observations made in the report that it
does not agree with the earlier reports cannot be
approved.
313. We, however, hasten to add that it is always
open to the State to collect relevant data to find
out as to whether a particular caste or community is
to be included in the list of other backward classes
or excluded from the same despite any decision to
the contrary taken earlier. The Constitution Bench
in Indra Sawhney has also laid down for periodical
review  which   is  for  the  purpose   and  object  that
those  communities    who  were   earlier   backward  and
advanced should be excluded and those communities
who were earlier advanced and might have degraded
into backward class should be included. Thus, the
State was fully entitled to appoint backward classes
commission to collect relevant data and submit the
report.
314.    When in earlier period of about 60 years,
right from 1955 to 2008, repeatedly it was held that
Maratha   community  is   not  backward   class,  Gaikwad
Commission ought to have applied the test that “what
happened thereafter that now the Maratha community
is to be included in OBC”.         The Commission has not
adverted    to   this    aspect    of    the     matter.    The
Commission ought to have also focused on comparative
analysis as to what happened in the recent years
that  Marathas    have   become    backward     from   forward
class. In this context, we may also refer to the
judgment of this Court in Ram Singh (supra) where
National   Backward    Classes   Commission     has   rejected
the claim of Jat to be included in other backward
communities    with   regard    to   several     States.    The
National    Commission      recommended       that    Jat    is
politically    dominant    class    and   need    not   to   be
included in OBC. The Union disregarding the said
report had issued a notification including Jat as
OBC in the different States in the Central List. It
was  challenged     in   this   Court     by   way   of    writ
petition.    This   Court    held    that    the   report    of
National Backward Classes Commission could not have
been disregarded and ought to have been given due
weight.   This   Court    held   that   Jat     community    is
politically organised class which was rightly not
included in the category of other backward classes.
In paragraph 55 following was laid down:
“55. The perception of a self-proclaimed
socially backward class of citizens or
even the perception of the “advanced
classes” as to the social status of the
“less fortunates” cannot continue to be a
constitutionally permissible yardstick for
determination of backwardness, both in the
context of Articles 15(4) and 16(4) of the
Constitution. Neither can backwardness any
longer be a matter of determination on the
basis of mathematical formulae evolved by
taking into account social, economic and
educational indicators. Determination of
relative: possible wrong inclusions cannot
be the basis for further inclusions but
the gates would be opened only to permit
entry of the most distressed. Any other
inclusion would be a serious abdication of
the constitutional duty of the State.
Judged by the aforesaid standards we must
hold that inclusion of the politically
organised classes (such as Jats) in the
List of Backward Classes mainly, if not
parameters other groups who have fared
better have been so included cannot be
affirmed.”
315.    We have already noted that after the 2014
enactment, writ petition was filed in the High Court
challenging   2014,    enactment   by   which   Maratha
community was declared as socially and educationally
backward class and separate reservation was provided
for. The Ordinance XIII of 2014 was issued to that
effect; writ petition was filed in the High Court
challenging the Ordinance and inclusion of Maratha
as    other   backward    category.   The    High   Court
elaborately heard all parties and passed a detailed
interim order in Writ Petition No.2053 of 2014 on
14.11.2014 where it set out various facts which were
placed before the Court for staying the Ordinance
and staying the grant of separate reservation to
Maratha community. We may refer to paragraph 40(e)
of   the  order  dated  14.11.2014  of   the  High  Court
"40.In the context of 16% reservation for
Marathas upon their classifications as
Educationally    and    Socially     Backward
Classes, he following position emerges:
(e) The petitioner in Public Interest
Litigation No.140 of 2014 placed on record
some statistics by reference to data
compiled by Dr. Suhas Palshikar in the
book on “Politics of Maharashtra: Local
Context   of   the   Political    Process:”,
Editors: Suhas Palshikar and Nitin Birmal,
Pratima Prakashan, 2007 which suggest
(I) From 1962 to 2004, from out of 2430
MLAs, 1336 MLAs corresponding to 55% were
institutions in the State are controlled
by Marathas.
(iii) Members of the Maratha community
dominate   the universities in the State
with 60 to 75% persons in the management.
(iv)Out of 105 sugar factories, almost 86
are controlled by Marathas. About 23
district cooperative banks have Marathas
as their Chairpersons.
institutions in the State         are under
control of Maratha community.
(vi)About 75 to 90% of the land in the
State is owned by Maratha community.
by or on behalf of the respondents in
any of the affidavits or at the hearing.
It was also stated by the petitioner at
Maharashtra on    1 November 1956,    out of
Marathas.   The    last  non-Maratha   Chief
Minister was    during   the period January
2003 to October 2004. This statement was
also not disputed.”
316. The above stated facts were not disputed before
the High Court, and before this Court also in the
submissions of the parties above facts have been
repeated and it has been submitted that those facts
clearly     prove   that   Maratha    are   not   socially
backward.    The  Commission   in  its   report  does  not
dispute that Maratha is politically dominant class.
In this context, following is extracted from the
“Political dominance cannot be ground
to    determine    social    and   educational
backwardness of any community.”
317.    We have already found that Maratha community
has adequate and sufficient representation in the
public     services.    We    have    also   noted    that
representation    of   Maratha  in   public   services  is
present in all categories i.e. Group A, Group B,
Group C and Group D posts, and the Marathas have
occupied     the    posts   by    competing    with   open
categories.     The   representation    of   Marathas   as
noticed above has in many grades about 30% against
all filled posts of open category. When a community
is able to compete with open category candidates and
obtain substantial number of seats (about 30%), this
was relevant fact to be noticed while considering
the  social   and   educational    backwardness    of   the
community.    Even    if    grant    and   non-grant     of
reservation to backward under Article 16(4) may not
be   considered    as    decisive    for   socially     and
educationally backward class for grant under Article
15(4) but grant or non-grant under Article 16(4)
certainly   is   relevant     for   consideration     which
reflects on backward class or classes both in favour
and against such backward class. We have noticed
that the Commission has taken erroneous view that
the representation of Maratha community in public
services is not proportionate to their population
and has recommended for grant of reservation under
Article 16(4). We having disapproved the grant of
reservation    under     Article    16(4)    to    Maratha
community, the said decision becomes relevant and
shall have certainly effect on the decision of the
Commission   holding    Maratha   to   be   socially    and
educationally   backward.     Sufficient    and   adequate
representation    of   Maratha    community    in   public
services is indicator that they are not socially and
educationally backward.
318. The Commission in its report while discussing,
in   Chapter  VIII   has   analysed   the  various  data
including   data  of   students   belonging  to  Maratha
community who are pursuing Engineering, Medical and
other disciplines. In paragraph 178 the Commission
has recorded that it obtained the information as
regards Marathas engaged in and pursuing academic
career, which would also throw light on the depth of
their involvement in higher education. In Paragraph
178, 1(b) the Commission has extracted a table for
the   last three   academic   years  (2014-15,  2015-16,
2016-17) in the Engineering Courses as received from
the Directorate of Technical Education of the State
Government. Out of open category seats in Diploma of
167168 Maratha achieved admission in 34,248 seats
and in Graduate out of 221127, they could receive
32045 admissions, under Post Graduate out of 63795
they could secure admission in 12666 . Similarly
details have been given about the Graduation and
Post-Gaduation Medical Courses for three years. In
MBBS    out   of   4720    in   the    year   2015-16  Maratha
received 428 seats, in other            streams out of 14360
they secured 2620 seats, in the above regards table
other-14098   other-1059      7.5%        (Aurveda
319.       Similarly, the Commission has given details
of Medical Post Graduation Courses in para-178-1(c)
(c-ii)      which indicates following with regard to
other     under-Graduate       and     Post-Graduate     posts,
details of which given in paragraph 178-1(d) which
320.      The    above    facts    and    figures    which   were
obtained   by    the   Commission       itself   indicate    that
students of Maratha community have succeeded in open
competition and got admissions in all the streams
including Engineering, Medical Graduation and Post-
Graduation     Courses     and    their    percentage    is   not
negligible.     The   computation      of   percentage   by   the
Commission    against     Maratha     is   since   out  of   open
category seats, since 50% seats are for reserved
category and only 50% are open, the percentage of
the Maratha, thus, shall substantially increase as
per table given by the Commission itself.
321.      The Commission has also made studies with
regard to representation of Maratha in prestigious
Central   services,     namely,     IAS,    IPS   and  IFS   with
regard   to  State   of  Maharashtra.    In   the   State  of
Maharashtra    out   of   161  posts    filled    from   open
category candidates, there are 25 IAS belonging from
Maratha. Similarly out of 140 posts filled from open
category, 39 of IPS belong to Maratha and in IFS out
of 97, 89 posts filled from open category, there are
16   IAS  belong   to   Maratha   community.         When  we
compute    the   percentage    of    IAS,   IPS    and   IFS,
percentage of Maratha out of the posts filled from
open category candidates comes to 15.52, 27.85 and
17.97 percentage respectively, which is substantial
representation    of  Marathas    in  prestigious     Central
services.
322.    We may further notice that the above numbers
of   Maratha   officers    are  only    in   the   State   of
Maharashtra on the posts of the IPS, IAS and IFS
being Central services. Similarly, the members of
Maratha community must have occupied the above posts
in the other States of the Country of which details
are not there.
323.     The   Commission  has    also   collected    data
regarding engagement of Maratha in Higher Academic
and Educational Fields of University Assignments in
the State in paragraph 226. The Table D has been
compiled by the Commission. In the said paragraph
where  Marathas   occupied  all   categories    of  posts,
including Head of Department, Professor, Associate
Professor  and   Assistant  Professor,    the  Commission
has in the Chart also noted the number of Marathas
occupying different posts in several Universities.
It is true that in some of the Universities there
may not be Maratha community in one or two posts but
Chart indicates that there are sufficient number of
Maratha in different Universities occupying posts of
HOD,  Professor,   Associate  Professor    and   Assistant
324.    There   cannot  be   any   concept   of   Marathas
occupying all higher posts including the posts in
the Universities according to their proportion of
population.   The  Commission    has  commented    in  the
report that their percentage in the above posts is
less, whereas Table indicates that in HOD post in
Savitribai   Phule    University   Pune,   out   of   open
category filled post of 29 of HOD, only 3 are from
Maratha community, out of 14 Professors only 2 are
from  Maratha   community   and   out  of   33  Associate
Professors only 3 are from Maratha community and out
of 79 Assistant Professors only 3 are from Maratha
community. The Commission concludes that only 4.3%
are from Maratha community in the above posts.
325. In the Higher Academic posts and posts like
IAS,  IPS  and  IFS,   there  cannot   be  any  basis   to
contend   that    since   Maratha    community    is   not
occupying  posts   according   to  their   proportion   of
population,   they   are   socially   and   educationally
backward classes. The above are the data and figures
on the basis of which the Commission concluded that
the Marathas are socially and educationally backward
class.  When   we   look  into   the  aforesaid    details
regarding  Maratha    students   occupying   Engineering,
Medical   and    other    streams,    Maratha    officers
occupying Central posts of IAS, IPS and IFS and are
occupying posts of Higher Academic in Universities,
mere   fact  that   their   occupation   of   posts  is  not
equivalent    to  the   proportion   of   their   population
cannot lead to the conclusion that they are socially
and educationally backward. We are conscious that
the Commission has conducted sample survey collected
representations and other information, data and has
allotted    marks    on   social   and    educational    and
economic backward class and in the marking Marathas
were found to be backward. However, data and facts
which have been collected by the Commission noted
above   clearly   indicate    that  Marathas    are  neither
socially    nor     educationally     backward     and   the
conclusion recorded by the Gaikwad Commission on the
basis of its marking system, indicator and marking
is   not  sufficient    to  conclude    that   Marathas  are
socially and educationally backward.
326. The facts and figures as noted above indicate
otherwise    and   on   the  basis   of    the   above  data
collected by the Commission, we are of the view that
the   conclusion    drawn   by   the   Commission    is  not
supportable    from    the  data    collected.       The    data
collected    and  tabled   by  the   Commission      as    noted
above clearly proves that Marathas are not socially
and educationally backward.
327.    We  have   completed   more     than   70    years    of
independence,     all   governments      have    been    making
efforts and taking measures for overall developments
of    all   classes    and   communities.      There      is    a
presumption unless rebutted that all communities and
castes have marched towards advancement. This Court
in   Ram   Singh   versus  Union    of    India    and   others
(Supra) has made such observations in paragraph 52:-
“52...This is because one may legitimately
presume progressive advancement of all
citizens on every front i.e. social,
economic and educational. Any other view
would amount to retrograde governance.
Yet, surprisingly the facts that stare at
us indicate a governmental affirmation of
such    negative    governance      inasmuch      as
decade old decisions not to treat the Jats
consideration     of   the    existing       ground
realities, have been reopened, in spite of
perceptible all-round development of the
nation. This is the basic fallacy inherent
in the impugned governmental decision that
proceedings...”
327(a). We    also   endorse   the   opinion  of   Brother
Justice S. Ravindra Bhat on affirmative actions and
giving of more and more incentives to realise the
constitutional objectives which undoubtedly is the
obligation and duty of the State.
328.    We are constrained to observe that when more
people     aspire    for    backwardness     instead    of
forwardness,    the   country   itself   stagnates   which
situation    is  not   in  accord    with  constitutional
objectives.
(14)The Constitution (One Hundred and Second
329. I have advantage of going through erudite draft
judgment circulated by my esteemed Brother, Ravindra
Bhat. Although, we both are aditem on the question
of   Constitutional    validity   of   Constitution   102nd
Amendment Act, 2018, I regret my inability to agree
with   the  interpretation   of   the  Constitution   102 nd
Amendment Act, 2018 as put by my esteemed Brother.
330. The case of the appellant is that after 102 nd
Amendment to the Constitution which came into force
with   effect   from   15.08.2018,   the   Maharashtra
Legislature had no competence to enact Act, 2018.
After the Constitution 102nd Amendment, the States
have no power to identify socially and educationally
backward classes. The Constitution 102nd Amendment
had  brought   change   in  the   regime  already   in
existence for backward class to fall it in line with
Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution. Article
366(26C) says that the phrase SEBCs “means” those
backward classes which are so deemed under Article
342A, for the purposes of this Constitution. The
expression “for the purposes of this Constitution”
is used in Articles 15(4) and 16(4), 338B, 342A and
in other Articles of the Constitution of India. In
view of Article 342A the SEBCs are those who are
specified by the President by public notification
for the purposes of a State or Union Territory under
sub-clause(1) of Article 342A. Article 342A being
analogous   to   Articles   341  and   342   must   be
interpreted    exactly   in   the  same   manner.   The
Parliament inserted phrase “Central List” in clause
(2) of Article 342A only to emphasize the fact that
after  Constitution   102nd Amendment,  the  only  list
that shall be drawn for the purposes of SEBCs is the
Central List drawn by the President.
331. Learned counsel for the appellant contends that
Maharashtra Legislature had no competence to enact
2018 Legislation after Constitution 102nd Amendment.
Learned senior counsel, Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan,
submitted    that   for   interpreting   Article   342A
reliance on Select Committee report of Rajya Sabha
is unwarranted.
332.     The above submissions of the appellant have
been stoutly refuted by the learned counsel for the
State of Maharashtra as well as other States. Under
Articles 15(4) and 16(4), the Union and the States
have co-equal powers to advance the interest of the
socially    and    educationally   backward    classes;
therefore, any exercise of power by the Union cannot
encroach upon the power of the State to identify
socially    and   educationally       backward     classes.   The
expression    “for    the   purpose     of   the   Constitution”
can,   therefore,      only   to    be    construed    with   the
contours   of   the    power   that    Union    is  entitled   to
exercise    with   respect     to   entities,      institutions,
authorities and public sector enterprises under the
control   of   the   Union.    The    power    to  identify   and
empower socially and educationally backward classes
and determining the extent of reservation required
is   vested   in   the   State    by   our    Constitution    and
recognised     by    judicial     pronouncements       including
Indra    Sawhney.      The    expression        “Central    List”
occurring     in    Article     342A(2)       relates    to   the
identification     under     Article     342A(1)    wherein   the
Central    List     will     include       the    socially    and
educationally backward classes for the purposes of
the   Central    Government.      Any    other    interpretation
would allow to whittle down the legislative power of
the State. Article 342A must be interpreted in the
historical     context.      It    is    submitted     that   the
Constitution 102nd Amendment has brought changes with
regard to Central List. The expression Central List
is well understood concept in service jurisprudence
for  reservation     purposes  of   OBC,   there  are  two
lists, Central List and State List.
333.     It    is   submitted  that    the   Parliamentary
Committee     report    and   other     materials    throw
considerable light on the intention of Parliament
for inserting Article 342A in the Constitution. The
Constitutional amendment has to be interpreted in
the light of the Parliamentary intention. The power
of the State Government to legislate cannot be taken
away without amendment of Articles 15 and 16. The
Parliament    has   not  even  exercised    its  power  to
occupy the field of a State by clearly using the
expression 'Central List' in sub-clause (2). If the
Constitution 102nd Amendment is interpreted in the
manner     as    appellants   are     interpreting,    the
Constitutional Amendment shall be violative of the
federal structure and shall be unconstitutional.
334.   We have in this batch of cases issued notice
to learned     Attorney General, the interpretation of
the  102nd   Amendment   to the   Constitution   of  India
being   in  question.    Shri  K.K.    Venugopal,   learned
Attorney general submits that the Constitution Bench
in Indra Sawhney in paragraph 847 had taken the view
that there ought to be a permanent body, in the
nature   of   a   Commission    or   Tribunal,   to   which
complaints of wrong inclusion or non-inclusion of
groups, classes and sections in the lists of Other
Backward Classes can be made. He submitted that the
Constitution    Bench  in   Indra   Sawhney  directed   the
Government of India, each of the State Governments
and the Administrations         of Union Territories to
constitute    a   permanent    body    for   entertaining,
examining    and    recommending     upon   requests    for
inclusion   and    complaints    of   over-inclusion    and
under-inclusion    in   the   lists   of   other  backward
classes of citizens.
335.   Learned Attorney General submits that in view
of the above nine-Judge Bench judgment of this Court
it is inconceivable that any such amendment can be
brought in the Constitution that no State shall have
competency to identify the backward classes, Article
15(4)    necessarily    includes     the     power    of
identification.    Under     Article     12    of    the
Constitution, the State includes the Government and
Parliament, and Government and Legislature of each
State. In event the States have to deprive their
rights  under   Articles  15(4)    and  16(4)    of  the
Constitution, a proviso had to be added. Article
15(4) and 16(4) are the source of power to identify
SEBC. The Constitution 102nd amendment has not made
any such amendment by which the effect of Articles
15(4) and 16(4) has been impacted. He submits that
the National Commission for Backward Classes Act,
1993 was passed by the Parliament in obedience of
direction of Indra Sawhney. Section 2(c) of the Act
defines  “lists”  which  is   clearly  limited   to  the
Central Government; Learned Attorney General submits
that Article 342A covers the Central Government list
alone.  Learned  Attorney   General   has   referred  to
Select Committee report dated 17.07.2017 and submits
that Select Committee report after considering the
response and clarification by the concerned Ministry
had opined that 102nd Amendment was not to take the
rights   of  the   State   to   identify   other   backward
classes in their States. He submits that rights of
the   State  to  identify     OBC  for   their   States  in
respect of the States are untouched. Referring to
State of Punjab, learned Attorney General submits
that   there   are   two   lists,    Central   List   which
contains 68 OBC, the State List which contains 71,
he submits that with regard to the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes the President was given power
in   the  Constitution    with    which   State   had    no
concern.   There   was  no   attempt   on   behalf  of  the
Parliament to modify Articles 15(4) and 16(4).
336. Learned Attorney submits that Article 342A has
to be read harmoniously with the other provisions of
the Constitution. Learned Attorney General has also
referred to a short affidavit filed by the Union of
India in Writ Petition (C) No.12 of 2021-Dinesh B.
vs. Union of India & Ors., wherein Union has taken
the stand that the power to identify and specify the
SEBCs lies with Parliament, only with reference to
the Central List of SEBCs. The State Governments may
have    their    separate      State    Lists    of    SEBCs   in
recruitment.     Learned     Attorney    General     adopts   the
same   stand    taken   by    the   Union   of   India    in  the
aforesaid      affidavit.       He    reiterated      that    the
Parliament by passing Constitution Amendment has not
taken    away   the   power     of   the  State    to   identify
backward classes (SEBCs) in their States.
337. He further submits that there is no violation
of basic structure of the Constitution. Replying to
the   argument     of    learned     counsel   for     the   writ
petitioner under clause (2) of Article 368 learned
Attorney    General    submits     that   power    to   identify
backward classes being under Articles 15 and 16,
there   is   no  occasion     to   examine   the    list   of  7 th
Schedule to find the source of power. He submits
that no amendments have been made in any of the
Lists of 7th Schedule so as to attract the proviso to
Article    368(2).    He   submits    that   the   Constitution
102nd Amendment did not require ratification by the
338.   Before    coming    to    the   Articles   in   the
Constitution    inserted    by   the  Constitution    102nd
Amendment,   we   need  to    notice   the  Statement   of
Objects and Reasons contained in the Constitution
(One Hundred and Twenty-Third Amendment) Bill, 2017
which was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 4 th April,
2017 and some details regarding legislative process
which culminated into passing of the Constitution
(One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018. When
Bill came for discussion to amend the Constitution
of India, it was passed by Lok Sabha on 10.04.2017.
Rajya  Sabha   on   motion   adopted   by  the   House  on
11.4.2017 referred the Bill to the Select Committee
for examination of the Bill and report thereon to
the Rajya Sabha. The Select Committee of Rajya Sabha
examined the Bill by holding 7 meetings. The Select
Committee asked clarification on various issues from
the  Ministry   and  after    receipt   of clarifications
submitted the report on 17.07.2017. The Constitution
(One Hundred and Twenty-Third Amendment) Bill, 2017
with   the    Select    Committee     report    came   for
consideration before the Rajya Sabha. The Bill was
passed with certain amendments on 31.07.2017 by the
Rajya Sabha. After passing of the Bill, it was again
taken by the Lok Sabha and it was passed by the Lok
Sabha on 2nd August, 2018. Rajya Sabha agreed to the
Bill on 6th August, 2018.
339.   The   Statement    of   Objects   and   Reasons    of
Constitution    102nd Amendment    are  contained   in  the
Constitution      (One     Hundred     and    Twenty-Third
Amendment) Bill, 2017. It is useful to extract the
entire Statement of Objects and Reasons as contained
The National Commission for the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes came into being
consequent upon passing of the Constitution
(Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990. The said
Commission was constituted on 12th March, 1992
replacing the Commission for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes set up under the Resolution
of 1987. Under article 338 of the Constitution,
the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes was constituted with the
objective   of   monitoring    all  the   safeguards
provided   for   the   Scheduled   Castes   and   the
Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution or other
laws.
2. Vide the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment)
Act, 2003, a separate National Commission for
Scheduled Tribes was created by inserting a new
article 338A in the Constitution. Consequently,
under article 338 of the Constitution, the
reference   was   restricted   to   the   National
Commission for the Scheduled Castes. Under clause
(10) of article 338 of the Constitution, the
National Commission for Scheduled Castes is
presently empowered to look into the grievances
and complaints of discrimination of Other Backward
Classes also.
3. In the year 1992, the Supreme Court of India in
the matter of Indra Sawhney and others Vs. Union
of India and others (AIR 1993, SC 477) had
directed the Government of India to constitute a
permanent body for entertaining, examining and
recommending requests for inclusion and complaints
of over-inclusion and under-inclusion in the
Central List of Other Backward Classes. Pursuant
to the said Judgment, the National Commission for
Backward Classes Act was enacted in April, 1993
and the National Commission for Backward Classes
was constituted on 14th August, 1993 under the
said Act. At present the functions of the National
Commission for Backward Classes is limited to
examining the requests for inclusion of any class
of citizens as a backward class in the Lists and
hear complaints of over-inclusion or under-
inclusion of any backward class in such lists and
tender such advice to the Central Government as it
deems appropriate. Now, in order to safeguard the
interests of the socially and educationally
backward classes more effectively, it is proposed
to create a National Commission for Backward
Classes with constitutional status at par with the
National Commission for Scheduled Castes and the
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.
4. The National Commission for the Scheduled
Castes has recommended in its Report for 2014-15
that the handling of the grievances of the
socially and educationally backward classes under
clause (10) of article 338 should be given to the
National Commission for Backward Classes.
5. In view of the above, it is proposed to amend
the Constitution of India, inter alia, to provide
(a) to insert a new article 338 so as to
constitute   the    National    Commission   for
Backward Classes which shall consist of a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other
Members. The said Commission will hear the
grievances of socially and educationally
backward classes, a function which has been
discharged so far by the National Commission
for Scheduled Castes under clause (10) of
(b) to insert a new article 342A so as to
provide that the President may, by public
notification,    specify   the    socially   and
educationally backward classes which shall
for the purposes of the Constitution be
deemed to be socially and educationally
backward classes.
6. The Bill    seeks    to  achieve   the  above
objectives.
340. By the Constitution 102nd Amendment, Articles
338 sub-clause (10), new Article 338B, Article 342A
and 366(26C) were inserted.
341. In the writ petition before the High Court, the
question was raised “whether the Constitution (One
Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018 affects the
competence of the Legislature to enact the impugned
Legislation.”     The     High     Court     noticed     the
parliamentary process including the report of Select
Committee. The High Court held that use of Central
List in sub-clause (2) of Article 342A is not in
vacuum but it must take its due meaning in reference
to the context. The High Court held that Parliament
being  conscious   of   the   facts  that   there   are  two
lists  operating   in    various   States,    firstly,   for
providing   reservation     prescribed    by   the   Central
Government in Central services and the other list
for providing reservation by the respective State
Governments, the Parliament intended that it would
retain  the  power   to   include   or  exclude    from  the
Central List. The High Court, further, held that had
the Parliament intended to deprive the State of its
power, it would have specifically mentioned so. The
High Court rejected the submission of the learned
counsel  for  the   appellants    that   the   Constitution
102nd Amendment denuded the power of the State to
legislate with regard to other backward categories
in respect to State.
342. We have also noticed that Writ Petition (C)
No.938 of 2020-Shiv Sangram and another vs. Union of
India and others, had been filed questioning the
constitutional     validity    of   the   Constitution     102nd
343.   We  in  the   present     case   are   concerned    with
Constitutional Amendment brought by the Constitution
(One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018. The
Constitutional Amendment is not a normal legislative
exercise and it is always carried out with an object
and  the   purpose.    The  Constitution     of  India    is   a
grand   norm     given   to   us  by   the   Framers   of   the
Constitution with great deliberations and debates.
The Constitution contained the objectives and goals
of   the   nation    and    contains     ideals      For    the
governance    by   the   State.    Justice    G.P.  Singh    in
'Principles     of   Statutory     Interpretation',    14th
Edition    under   the    heading    'Intention   of   the
Legislature' explains the statutory interpretation
Legislature" and the conventional way of
interpreting or construing a statute is to
seek the 'intention' of its maker. A
statute is to be construed according 'to
the intent of those that make it' and 'the
duty of judicature is to act upon the true
intention of the Legislature-the mens or
sententia      legis'."      The     expression
'intention of the Legislature' is a
shorthand reference to the meaning of the
words used by the Legislature objectively
determined with the guidance furnished by
the accepted principles of interpretation.
"If a statutory provision is open to more
than one interpretation the court has to
represents the true intention of the
Legislature, in other words the legal
statutory provision.”
344. Chief Justice, Sir, Maurice Gwyer speaking in
Federal Court, in       The Central Province and Berar
Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxations Act,
1938,   AIR  1939  Federal    Court  1,  held  that  rules
which apply to the interpretation of other statute
applies   equally   to   the   interpretation   of  the
constitutional enactment. But their application is
of necessity condition by the subject matter of the
enactment itself.
345. On the interpretation of the Constitution of
India, a Constitution Bench of this Court in ITC
Ltd. vs. Agricultural Produce Market Committee and
others,   (2002)  9  SCC   232,   laid  down  following
"59. The Constitution of India deserves
to be interpreted, language permitting, in a
manner that    it does not whittle down the
powers of the State Legislature and preserves
the federalism while also upholding the
Central supremacy as contemplated by some of
its articles.”
346.     It is said that the statute is an edict of
the   Legislature.    The   elementary   principle   of
interpreting      the Constitution or statute is to
look into the words used in the statute, when the
language is clear, the intention of the Legislature
is to be gathered from the language used. The aid to
interpretation is resorted to only when there is
some ambiguity in words or expression used in the
statute. The rule of harmonious construction, the
rule of reading of the provisions together as also
rule of giving effect to the purpose of the statute,
and   few    other   principles   of  interpretation   are
called in question when aids to construction are
necessary in       particular context. We have already
noticed the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
statute in the earlier paragraph. Paragraph 5 of the
Statement of Objects and Reasons mentions amendment
of Constitution by (a) inserting a new Article 338B
so   as   to  constitute   the  National   Commission  for
Backward Classes and (b) to insert a new Article
342A so as to provide that the President may, by
public     notification,    specify   the   socially   and
educationally backward classes. The Bill was moved
by    Thawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice
and Empowerment.
347.    Learned   counsel   for  both  the   parties  have
advanced      the    respective    submissions    on   the
interpretation of words “Central List” as used in
clause (2) of Article 342A. Both the parties having
advanced   divergent    submissions    on  the   true  and
correct interpretation of “Central List”, it becomes
necessary to take aid of interpretation. What was
the  purpose    and   object   of   uses   of   expression
'Central List', sub-clause (2) of Article 342A has
to be looked into to find a correct meaning of the
constitutional provisions.
348. We have noticed above that learned Attorney
General as well as learned counsel for the State of
Maharashtra and other States have relied on Select
Committee   report,   debates   in   Parliament   and  the
Statement of Minister to find out the intention of
the  Parliament   in   inserting   Article   342A  of  the
349.  Shri   Gopal   Sankaranarayanan,    learned   senior
counsel   for   the   petitioner    has   questioned   the
admissibility of Parliamentary Committee report. He
submits that Parliamentary Committee report is not
admissible    and    cannot    be    used   as    aid   to
interpretation which submission has been refuted by
Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel as well
Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel, who state
that   Parliamentary     Committee    report     as   well   the
Statement made by the Minister in the Parliament are
admissible     aids   to   the    interpretation       and   are
necessary     to   find    out    the   intention       of   the
Parliament in bringing the 102nd Amendment to the
Constitution. We, thus, proceed to look into the law
as   to  admissibility      of   report   of    Parliamentary
Committee     and    Statement     of    Minister      in    the
Parliament    as   aids  to   interpret    a   constitutional
provision.
350.   Shri   Gopal   Sankaranarayanan,      relying     on  the
judgment    of   this   Court   in   State    of   Travancore,
Cochin and others vs. Bombay Company Ltd., AIR 1952
SC 366, submits that this Court observed that the
“speeches made by the members of the Constituent
Assembly    as   external    aid   to   the    constitutional
interpretation      is    not    admissible.       Mr.     Gopal
Sankaranarayanan      relies   on   paragraph      16   of   the
judgment which is to the following effect:
“16. It remains only to point out that
the use made by the learned Judges below
of the speeches made by the members of the
Constituent Assembly in the course of the
debates on the draft Constitution is
unwarranted. That this form of extrinsic
aid to the interpretation of statutes is
not admissible has been generally accepted
in England, and the same rule has been
observed in the construction of Indian
statutes — see Administrator-General of
Bengal v. Prem Nath Mallick [22 IA 107,
118] . The reason behind the rule was
indicative of the subjective intent of the
speaker, but it could not reflect the
inarticulate mental process lying behind
the majority vote which carried the bill.
Nor is it reasonable to assume that the
minds of all those legislators were in
accord,”
“Those who did not speak may not have
agreed with those who did; and those who
— United States v. Trans-Missouri Freight
This rule of exclusion has not always
been adhered to in America, and sometimes
distinction is made between using such
material to ascertain the purpose of a
statute and using it for ascertaining its
meaning. It would seem that the rule is
see Craies on Statute Law, 5th Ed., p.
351. It is relevant to notice that in paragraph 16
it was also observed that rule of exclusion has not
always    been  upheld  to  in   America  and   sometime
distinction is made between using such material to
ascertaining purpose of a statute and using it for
ascertaining    its   meaning.   The   judgment   itself
indicated that the said material is sometime used to
ascertain the purpose of a statute. The law has been
explained and elaborated in subsequent judgments of
this Court which we shall notice hereinafter. One
more judgment on which reliance has been placed by
Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan is the judgment of this
Court in Aswini Kumar Ghose and another v. Arabinda
Bose and another, AIR 1952 SC 369, in which this
Court referring to earlier judgment of this Court in
State of Travancore, Cochin and others vs. Bombay
Company Ltd.(supra) laid down in paragraph 31:
“31. As regards the speeches made by the
Members of the House in the course of the
debate, this Court has recently held that
they are not admissible as extrinsic aids
to     the    interpretation     of    statutory
provisions:       (State     of     Travancore-
Cochin v. Bombay Co. Ltd. etc. [ CA Nos.
25, 28 and 29 of 1952]”
352.   With    regard   to  speeches   in  the   Constituent
Assembly, the        Constitution Bench of this Court,
in   His    Holiness   Kesvananda   Bharati   vs.   State  of
Kerala     and   another,   (1973)   4   SCC   225,   several
Hon'ble     Judges   in  their   separate    judgments   have
relied and referred to Constituent Assembly debates
for the interpretation of provisions of Part III and
Part IV. Justice S.M. Sikri, CJ in paragraph 116
“186. The speeches can, in my view, be
course of the progress of a particular
provision or provisions throws any light
on the historical background or shows that
a common understanding or agreement was
arrived at between certain sections of the
people..”
353.    Justice    Jaganmohan   Reddy   stoutly   said   that
Constituent      Assembly  debates    be  looked    into  for
ascertaining       intention   of   our   framers     of  the
Constitution.    Justice   Jaganmohan   Reddy   also   held
that in a constitutional matter this Court should
look   into   the    proceedings    of     relevant    date
including   any   speech    which  may   throw   light   in
ascertaining     it.    Justice   Jaganmohan    Reddy    in
“1088. ...Speaking for myself, why
should we not look into them boldly for
ascertaining what was the intention of our
framers and how they translated that
intention? What is the rationale for
treating them as forbidden or forbidding
material. The Court in a constitutional
matter, where the intent of the framers of
the Constitution as embodied in the
written document is to be ascertained,
should look into the proceedings, the
relevant data including any speech which
may throw light on ascertaining it. It can
reject them as unhelpful, if they throw no
light or throw only dim light in which
statute, a Constitution is a working
instrument of Government, it is drafted by
people who wanted it to be a national
instrument      to     subserve     successive
generations.     The    Assembly   constituted
Committees of able men of high calibre,
learning and wide experience, and it had
an able adviser, Shri B.N. Rau to assist
354. Justice H.R. Khanna in paragraph 1358 also in
his judgment had elaborately referred to and relied
on the speeches made in the Constituent Assembly. In
paragraph 1367 His Lordship laid down:
concerned as to whether the speeches made
in the Constituent Assembly can be taken
into consideration, this court has in
Nath v. State         of          Punjab, H.H.
Scindia Bahadur v. Union of India [(1971)
India v. H.S. Dhillon [(1971) 2 SCC 779 :
(1972) 2 SCR 33] taken the view that such
speeches can be taken into account.
In Golak Nath case Subba Rao, C.J., who
spoke for the majority referred to the
speeches of Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru and Dr
Ambedkar on p. 791. Reference was also
Bachawat, J. in that case on p. 924. In
the case of Madhav Rao, Shah, J. who gave
the leading majority judgment relied upon
Reference was also made to the speeches in
the Constituent Assembly by Mitter, J. on
pages 121 and 122. More recently in H.S.
Dhilion case relating to the validity of
amendment in Wealth Tax Act, both the
majority judgment as well as the minority
judgment referred to the speeches made in
the Constituent Assembly in support of the
conclusion arrived at. It can, therefore,
be said that this Court has now accepted
the view in its decisions since Golak Nath
case that speeches made in the Constituent
Assembly can be referred to while dealing
with the provision of the Constitution.”
355. Justice K.K. Mathew in paragraph 1598 had held
that the debates in the Constituent Assembly can be
looked into to understand the legislative history of
a   provision   of   the   Constitution     including  its
derivation, that is, the various steps leading up to
and   attending    its   enactment,    to   ascertain  the
intention    of  the   makers      of  the   Constitution.
Following was laid down in paragraph 1598:
Constituent Assembly can be looked into to
understand the legislative history of a
provision of the Constitution including
its derivation, that is, the various steps
leading up to and attending its enactment,
to ascertain the intention of the makers
of the Constitution, it is difficult to
see why the debates are inadmissible to
throw light on the purpose and general
intent of the provision. After all,
legislative history only tends to reveal
the legislative purpose in enacting the
provision and thereby sheds light upon
legislative intent. It would be drawing an
invisible distinction if resort to debates
legislative history and the same is not
allowed to show the legislative intent in
case of latent ambiguity in the provision.
356. In the Constitution Bench in R.S. Nayak vs.
A.R.   Antulay,  1984(2)    SCC   183,  The   argument was
again advanced that debates in Parliament or the
report of the Commission or Committee which proceed
the    enactment    is    not    permissible      aid  to
construction. Submission was noted in paragraph 32
of the judgment to the following effect:
“32. Mr. Singhvi contended that even
where the words in a statute are ambiguous
and may be open to more than one meaning
or sense, a reference to the debates in
Parliament or the report of a commission
consideration is not a permissible aid to
construction. ...”
357. In paragraph 33 it was held that in order to
ascertain   true  meaning   of   literal   words   in the
statute reference to the report are held legitimate
external aid. In paragraph 33 following was laid
“33. The trend certainly seems to be
in the reverse gear in that in order to
ascertain the true meaning of ambiguous
words in a statute, reference to the
reports   and    recommendations      of    the
commission or committee which preceded the
legitimate external aids to construction.
The modern approach has to a considerable
extent eroded the exclusionary rule even
in England. ……”
358. Ultimately, this Court rejected the submission
raised    and held that the reports of the Committee
were   admissible.    Following    was  laid   down in
“34. ….Further even in the land of its
birth, the exclusionary rule has received
International Ltd. v. Papierwerke Waldhof-
843] Lord Simon of Claisdale in his speech
admissibility of Greer Report observed as
“At the very least, ascertainment of
the statutory objective can immediately
eliminate many of the possible meanings
remains, consideration of the statutory
resolving it.
The statutory objective is primarily to
be collected from the provisions of the
statute itself. In these days, when the
long title can be amended in both Houses,
I can see no reason for having recourse to
it only in case of an ambiguity — it is
the plainest of all the guides to the
general objectives of a statute. But it
will not always help as to particular
provisions. As to the statutory objective
of these, a report leading to the Act is
likely to be the most potent aid; and, in
my judgment, it would be mere obscurantism
not to avail oneself of it. There is,
indeed clear and high authority that it is
available for this purpose. ……”
359.    It    is    noted    that   although     the    above
Constitution     Bench   was   subsequently   overruled    by
seven-Judge Bench but the above proposition was not
touched.
We   may    also   notice   the   Constitution     Bench
judgment of this Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and
others vs. Union of India and others, (1980) 3 SCC
625.    CJ,    Y.V.    Chandrachud     speaking    for    the
Constitution      Bench   referred    to   speech    of   Law
Minister made in the Parliament and held that the
constitutional provisions cannot be read contrary to
its  proclaimed     purpose   as  was  stated   by   the  Law
Minister in the floor of the House. In paragraph 65
“65. Mr. Palkhivala read out to us an
extract from the speech of the then Law
Minister who, while speaking on the
amendment to Article 31-C, said that the
amendment was being introduced because the
government did not want the “let and
hindrance” of the fundamental rights. If
the Parliament has manifested a clear
intention to exercise an unlimited power,
it is impermissible to read down the
amplitude of that power so as to make it
limited. The principle of reading down
cannot be invoked or applied in opposition
to the clear intention of the legislature.
We suppose that in the history of the
constitutional    law,   no   constitutional
amendment has ever been read down to mean
the exact opposite of what it says and
intends. In fact, to accept the argument
that we should read down Article 31-C, so
as to make it conform to the ratio of the
Bharati [Kesavananda Bharati v. State of
: AIR 1973 SC 1461] , is to destroy the
indicated by the very heading “Saving of
Certain Laws” under which Articles 31-A,
31-B and 31-C are grouped. Since the
empowering the legislatures to pass laws
of a particular description even if those
laws violate the discipline of Articles 14
and 19, it seems to us impossible to hold
that we should still save Article 31-C
from the challenge of unconstitutionality
by reading into that Article words which
destroy the rationale of that Article and
an intendment which is plainly contrary to
its proclaimed purpose.”
360. We may conclude the discussion on the topic by
referring to a subsequent Constitution judgment of
this Court in Kalpana Mehta and others vs. Union of
India and others, (2018) 7 SCC 1, in which one of us
Justice  Ashok  Bhushan   was  also  a   member.  In the
above case, the Constitution Bench elaborately dealt
with the role of Parliamentary Committee. One of the
questions   which    was   referred   to   before   the
Constitution   Bench  to  answer  was   “whether  in   a
litigation filed before this Court under Article 32
and our Court can refer to and place reliance upon
the report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee.
The Constitution Bench referring to earlier judgment
of this Court in R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay (supra)
laid down following in paragraphs 123 and 134:
“123. A    Constitution   Bench    in R.S.
Nayak v. A.R. Antulay [R.S. Nayak v. A.R.
Antulay, (1984) 2 SCC 183, after referring
to various decisions of this Court and
development in the law, opined that the
exclusionary rule is flickering in its
dying embers in its native land of birth
and has been given a decent burial by this
Court. The Constitution Bench further
observed that the basic purpose of all
canons of the Constitution is to ascertain
with reasonable certainty the intention of
Parliament and for the said purpose,
external aids such as reports of Special
Committee preceding the enactment, the
existing state of law, the environment
necessitating enactment of a legislation
and the object sought to be achieved, etc.
which Parliament held the luxury of
availing should not be denied to the court
whose primary function is to give effect
to the real intention of the legislature
in enacting a statute. The Court was of
the view that such a denial would deprive
illuminating aid to construction and,
therefore, the Court decided to depart
from the earlier decisions and held that
reports of committees which preceded the
enactment of a law, reports of Joint
Parliamentary Committees and a report of a
information can be referred to as external
aids of construction.
134. From the aforesaid, it clear as day
that the Court can take aid of the report
of the Parliamentary Committee for the
purpose of appreciating the historical
background of the statutory provisions and
it can also refer to committee report or
the speech of the Minister on the floor of
the House of Parliament if there is any
kind of ambiguity or incongruity in a
provision of an enactment.”
361.    Justice Dipak Misra, CJ speaking for himself
and Justice A.M. Khanwilkar recorded his conclusion
in   paragraph  159.1  and  159.2  to   the  following
report can be taken aid of for the purpose
of interpretation of a statutory provision
wherever it is so necessary and also it
can be taken note of as existence of a
historical fact.
159.2. Judicial notice can be taken of
the    Parliamentary   Standing    Committee
report under Section 57(4) of the Evidence
Act and it is admissible under Section 74
of the said Act.”
362.      Dr.  Justice  D.Y.   Chandrachud   laid  down
“260. The use of parliamentary history
as an aid to statutory construction is an
area which poses the fewest problems. In
understanding the true meaning of the
words used by the legislature, the court
may have regard to the reasons which have
problems which were sought to be remedied
and the object and purpose of the law. For
understanding this, the court may seek
recourse    to   background    parliamentary
material associated with the framing of
the law.”
363.   Justice  Ashok  Bhushan,   one  of  us,  in  his
concurring judgment has observed that Committees of
both Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha are entrusted with
enormous duties and responsibilities in reference to
the functions of Parliament. Following was observed
“335. Various committees of both Rajya
Sabha and Lok Sabha are entrusted with
enormous duties and responsibilities in
reference to the functions of Parliament.
Maitland    in Constitutional     History   of
England while referring to the committees
of the Houses of British Parliament
noticed the functions of the committees in
“… Then again by means of committees
the Houses now exercise what we may call
an inquisitorial power. If anything is
investigate the matter; witnesses can be
summoned to give evidence on oath, and
committed for contempt. All manner of
subjects concerning the public have of
late been investigated by parliamentary
obtained which may be used as a basis
recommendation        of      administrative
reforms.”
364.   After noticing the relevant Rules, it was held
that parliamentary materials including reports and
other   documents   are   permissible   to  be  given  as
evidence   in  the   Court  of  law.   In  paragraph  351
“351. From the above discussion it is
parliamentary materials including reports
and other documents have been sent from
Parliament itself to be given as evidence
in courts of law.”
365. Noticing the observation of House of Lords in
Pepper    (Inspector     of   Taxes)    v.    Hart,   that
parliamentary     materials    for     the   purpose    of
construing    legislation    can   be    used,   following
observation in paragraph 380 was made:
“380. In the end Lord Wilkinson held
that reference to parliamentary materials
for the purpose of construing legislation
does not breach Article 9 of the Bill of
Rights (1688). The following was held:
Taxes) v. Hart, 1993 AC 593 : (1992) 3 WLR
matter of pure law this House should
look at Hansard and give effect to the
parliamentary intention it discloses in
deciding the appeal. The problem is the
indication given by the Attorney General
privileges of the House of Commons.
judgment    reference     to     parliamentary
materials for the purpose of construing
legislation does not breach Article 9 of
the Bill of Rights. …””
366. In paragraph 395, it was also noted by this
Court    that   parliamentary     proceeding      including
reports of the Standing committee of Parliament were
relied in large number of cases of this Court. In
paragraph 395 following was laid down:
“395. This Court in a number of cases has
parliamentary      proceedings        including
reports of the Standing Committee of
Parliament. The learned counsel for the
petitioners    have   given     reference     to
namely, Catering    Cleaners      of   Southern
Railway v. Union      of       India [Catering
Cleaners of Southern Railway v. Union of
consideration    report     of     a    Standing
Committee   of   petitions.      Another    case
Board v. Hind     Mazdoor       Sabha [Gujarat
Electricity Board v. Hind Mazdoor Sabha,
In State of Maharashtra v. Milind [State
of Maharashtrav. Milind, (2001) 1 SCC 4 :
Parliamentary        Committee           report.
Assn. v. Union of India [Federation of
Railway Officers Assn. v. Union of India,
(2003) 4 SCC 289 : AIR 2003 SC 1344], the
Court has referred to a report of the
Standing   Committee     of    Parliament     on
India [Aruna Royv. Union of India, (2002)
Committee, namely, S.B. Chavan Committee,
which was appointed by Parliament was
relied and referred. M.C. Mehta v. Union
of India [M.C. Mehta v. Union of India,
(2017) 7 SCC 243] was again a case where
Parliament on Petroleum and Natural Gas
has been referred to and relied. Other
judgments where Parliamentary Committee
reports have been relied are Kishan Lal
Gera v. State      of   Haryana [Krishan      Lal
Gera v. State of Haryana, (2011) 10 SCC
529] , Modern Dental College and Research
Centre v. State of M.P. [Modern Dental
College & Research Centre v. State of
M.P., (2016) 7 SCC 353 : 7 SCEC 1] and Lal
Babu    Priyadarshi v. Amritpal       Singh [Lal
Babu Priyadarshi v. Amritpal Singh, (2015)
367. The above discussion makes it clear that the
law    is    well    settled     in    this    county   that
Parliamentary     Committee    reports    including   speech
given   by  the   Minister   in   the  Parliament   and  the
debates    are   relevant   materials    to  ascertain   the
intention      of    Parliament       while     constituting
constitutional     provisions.     We,   thus,   reject  the
objection     of   Shri    Gopal    Sankaranarayanan    that
Parliamentary Committee        report and the speech of
the Minister cannot be looked into for ascertaining
the    intention     of   Parliament      in   bringing   the
368. The intention of the Parliament             for bringing
the   constitutional     amendment    is   necessary   to  be
found      out    to    interpret     the      constitutional
amendments.      The    words    used    in    constitutional
amendment have to be interpreted in the context for
which they were used. We may refer to the celebrated
words of Justice Holmes in Towne v. Eisner, 245 US
418,    where  he  observed:    “a  word    is  not  crystal,
transparent and unchanged; it is a skin of living
thought and may very greatly in colour and content
according to the circumstances and the time in which
it   is   used.”  In   what   context  the    words  “Central
List” has been used in Article 342A(1) has to find
out and what was the intent of Parliament in using
the words “Central List” in sub-clause (2) and what
was   the    intent   of   the   Parliament     in  inserting
Article 342A in the Constitution are relevant for
purposes of constitutional interpretation.
369.   We need to look into the parliamentary process
which    culminated    into    parliament    passing    the
Constitution    (123rd   Amendment)     Bill,   2017    was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 02.04.2017 and was
passed in Lok Sabha on 10.04.2017. When the Bill
came to the Rajya Sabha, by a Motion adopted by the
House on 11.04.2017, the Bill was referred to the
Select Committee comprising of 25 members of Rajya
Sabha.     The Select Committee held seven meetings
before submitting its report. Several members gave
their   response   to   the   Committee.   In   the   first
meeting    of  the    Committee    held   on   17.04.2017,
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment placed
certain   clarification    of   the  Minister   which   was
noticed   and  incorporated     in  paragraph   6   of  the
Minutes which is to the following effect:
“6. Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment further clarified that
under the Backward Classes, unlike the SCs
Central List and the State List. The
Central List provides for education and
employment     opportunities     in     Central
Government Institutions. In the State
List, the States are free to include or
exclude, whoever they wish to, in their
Backward Classes List. As a result, if
there is a certain category which is not
in the Central List, it may still be found
in the State List. That is the freedom and
prerogative of the State Backward Classes
Commission and that would continue to be
there.
370. The Committee in its meeting held on 22.05.2017
asked    several    clarifications.     One    of    the
clarifications asked was “To what extent the rights
of the States would be affected after coming into by
the   Bill  under  the   Constitution  of   the   Select
371. The Committee held sixth meeting on 03.07.2017.
One of the proposed amendments have been noted in
paragraph 21 of the Minutes, clarification on which
was also noted in paragraph and the amendment was
not    accepted.    The    amendment    proposed     was
“notwithstanding in any … in clause (9), the State
Government shall continue to have power … socially
and   educationally   backward   classes.”   The   above
proposed amendment in Article 338B was not accepted
since Ministry clarified that the power of the State
is not affected. Paragraphs 21, 22 and 23 are as
amendment wherein in article 338B a new
inserted. This sub-clause (10) would state
that ‘notwithstanding anything provided in
clause 9, the State Government shall
continue to have powers to identify
Socially       and    Educationally     Backward
22. It was clarified by the Ministry
amendment does not interfere with the
identify the Socially and Educationally
Backward Classes. The existing powers of
the State Backward Classes Commission
would continue to be there even after the
passage of the Constitution (One Hundred
and Twenty-third Amendment) Bill, 2017.
23. The Committee held discussions on
the amendments proposed and in view of the
explanation given by the Ministry, the
Committee adopted clause 3 without any
amendments.”
372.    Article     342A   was   also   discussed   by  the
Committee various set of Amendments were noted in
reference    to   Article   342A.   The  Committee  noticed
amendments proposed in Article 342A in paragraph 24
“24. The Committee then took up Clause
4 of the Bill for consideration. The
Committee     considered   the    following
amendment proposed by certain Members:
(h) Sub-clause (1) of article 342A be
"The President with respect to any State
or Union Territory, and where it is a
governor thereof, by public notification
specify the socially and educationally
backward classes for the purposes of
making provisions for reservation of
appointment to an office or posts under
authority of Government of India or
under the control of the Government of
India or seats in Central Government
(ii) Sub-clause (2) of article 342A be
"The President may, on the advise of
the National Commission for Backward
Classes include or exclude from the
educationally backward classes specified
in a notification issued under clause
(iii) In article 342A insert clause (3) as
notification specify the socially and
educational backward classes for the
reservation of posts under that State or
under any other authority of the State
or under the central of the State, or
seats in the educational institutions.
(iv)In article 342A insert clause (4) as
"The Governor may, on the advice of the
State Commission of Backward Classes
include or exclude from the State list
of socially and educationally backward
classes specified in a notification
issued under clause (3)”
373.   The Committee, however, did not accept any of
the amendments in view of explanation furnished by
the Ministry. The 7th meeting was held on 14.07.2017.
The   clarification   issued  by  the   Secretary  of
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has been
noticed in paragraph 29 which is to the following
“29. ………She also clarified that conferring
of constitutional status on the National
Commission for Backward Classes would in
no way take away the existing powers of
the State Backward Classes Commissions.
The only difference would be with regard
to the Central List, where the power of
Constitutional amendment, it would come to
the Parliament with the recommendations of
the NCBC.”
374.   After   elaborate   discussion,   the  Committee
submitted its report dated 19.07.2017. One of the
amendments which was moved before the Committee in
Article 338B was noticed and not accepted. In the
report   the   Ministry's   stand   was  that  proposed
amendment does not interfere with the power of the
State   Government   to   identify   the  socially  and
educationally backward classes. Paragraphs 47 and 48
“47. The Committee discussed the amendment
wherein in article 338B a new sub-clause
(10) was proposed to be inserted. This
sub-clause (10) would read as follows:
‘Notwithstanding anything provided in
clause 9, the State Government shall
continue to have powers to identify
Socially    and   Educationally   Backward
48. It was clarified by the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment to the
Committee that the proposed amendment does
not interfere with the powers of the State
Governments to identify the Socially and
existing powers of the State Backward
Classes Commission would continue to be
Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-third
375. With regard to the proposed Article 342A of the
Constitution, in paragraph 67 the Committee recorded
the observation to the following effect:
“67.The    Committee     observes     that   the
amendments do not in any way affect the
independence and functioning of State
Backward Classes Commissions' and they
will continue to exercise unhindered their
powers of inclusion/exclusion of other
backward classes with relation to State
376.    The   Select   Committee's      report   came   for
consideration    before   the   Rajya  Sabha.   During  the
debate,   members   have   expressed   their   apprehension
regarding   adversely    affecting    the   rights  of  the
State by the proposed constitutional amendment. The
Rajya   Sabha   passed   the   Bill   on   31.07.2017  with
amendment.     Shri   Thawarchand    Gehlot,   Minister  of
Social Justice and Empowerment proposed the Bill.
Several   members   expressed    their   apprehension  that
Bill is not in the interest of the powers of the
State. Shri B.K. Hari Prasad speaking on the Bill
“SHRI B.K. HARIPRASAD: Sir, repealing
the Act of 1993 means that nothing would
stay as it is and, again, the directions
of the Supreme Court are being negated.
So, this Commission would not help the
Backward Classes and would take away the
powers of the States too. They want to
centralize all the powers, as they have
done in other cases. This cannot happen
in the case of OBCS. As I have already
Parliament way back in 1993 for purposes
of employment, etc. and way back in 2007
implemented so far. If they centralize
identification of castes, etc., they
would be doing gross injustice to the
OBCS. They should think twice before
because, as I have already mentioned, it
is the States which identify various
castes and communities. They know better
than the people sitting here in Delhi.
Hence, amending Article 342 and equating
identification of OBC List to the SC/ST
List should not be done. ...”
377. Shri Bhupender Yadav has also stated in his
speech that Amendment Bill cast threat to federalism
and the State interest. In his statement (translated
“......that this will be a big threat
to the federalism of the country and what
will happen to the rights of the States?
subject should go before the House and
through the House to the country that
about five and a half thousand castes and
categories are under OBC in the Central
List of the country and about ten and a
half thousand castes and categories are
under OBC in the States List. The work of
their identification (SIC) and the power
that Parliament has, is for five and a
half thousand Central List only, the
rights of the States will be safe with
them and therefore, they have done the
structure through this amendment. For the
first time, we have created the system
that if the work of filling up the OBC
posts will not be done, then the report of
the OBC Commission will be placed before
the Parliament. This should be the demand
of democracy of the country that if the
lower class people do not get justice,
then all those documents should come
before   the   Parliament   with    reasons.
Provision to do the same has been made in
this OBC Commission.”
378.   Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey(Odisha), in his speech
has  referred  to  State  List  and  Central   List and
stated   (translated   from  Hindi)   that   powers  to
identify OBC are remained with the State.
Sir, you gave me an opportunity to speak
on the very important Amendment Bill, for
this, I thank you. Sir, in our country,
reservation for OBC was given about 24
years ago but there is a clear provision
in Article 14-15 of the Constitution that
the States can make special provision for
the socio-economic backward classes. Our
Commission to be made for OBC and we are.
supporting it but we have some issues and
concerns and I would like to present them
before the House. Sir, as per the present
system, every State has its own OBC list
and on that basis, they get reservation.
If, in a State, any caste falls under OBC
list then it is not mandatory that it
falls under the Central or other States
list. The logic behind this is that there
are different castes in every state and
these different castes have different
conditions. Now, after formation of the
National Commission, one Central list will
be made and only Centre shall notify them.
Sir, this is the opinion of our party that
the power of notification of OBC castes
should remain with the States only because
only the concerned state thoroughly knows
the fact of number of castes in their
States and what is their condition. Only
the government knows thoroughly. They may
face    problems   with    central    list.
Therefore, I would like to appeal to
Hon'ble Minister and the House to add such
a provision in the Bill whereby the work
of adding or deleting any caste from the
OBC list should be strictly done only on
the recommendation of the state government
to which it relates to. Sir, you can make
national list after the uniformity comes
gradually.   When   S.C.,   S.T,   National
Commission was formed, it also took much
time. In my opinion, after the separate
S.C., S.T. Commission was formed, it got
the status of Constitutional body in 2003.
Therefore, 1 would like to appeal to the
House and the government to reconsider and
think on this point. Further, I would like
observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court,
there was a provision of review after
every 10 years so that other castes are
not left, therefore, it should be reviewed
after every 10 years. In my opinion, do
the needful keeping it in view also, thank
you.”
379.   Similar   apprehension    was  expressed  by   T.K.
Rangarajan and Shri Pradeep Tamta that Article 342A
takes   away   the   existing  powers  of  the  State   to
notify list of SEBC. After the debate, the Bill was
presented and passed in Rajya Sabha.
380.    The Minister, Shri Thawarchand Gehlot, after
the debate stated that apprehension expressed by the
members that power of the State shall be affected
and federal structure shall be damaged is incorrect.
He stated that the power of the State shall not be
affected    in   any   manner,   the  State's   power   to
include and exclude in its list of OBC shall still
continue. The statement (translated from Hindi) made
by the Minster is to the following effect:
made in the Constitution; one amendment
wherein, OBC Commission did not have power
to hear grievances of the people belonging
Commission, now this power is being given
to the upcoming OBC Commission. There is
provision of SC Commission under Article
338, provision of ST Commission is under
338(A) and now provision of constituting
OBC Commission is being made under Article
338(B). SC Commission and ST Commission
already    have    Constitutional     status
similarly, Constitutional status is being
given to OBC Commission as well. It simply
means that the way rights, duties and
Commission, same rights have also been
provide for the inclusion and removal of
the castes of the respective categories.
inclusion and removal of the castes
belonging to OBC category by adopting the
same procedure. Along with this, various
types of definitions are given in Article
366; castes belonging to SC category are
referred to in sub-clause 24 of it; castes
belonging to ST category are referred to
Article 26(C) is added to it. On the basis
of it, castes belonging to OBC category
will be defined. Hon'ble members were
Commissions have at present that might be
reduced and the federal system will be
violated, pertaining to this I am to say
that it will not at all happen. There is
no provision anywhere in the Articles to
reduce their rights in any way. States
have constituted OBC Commission in their
respective territories since long ago.
When the Kaka Kalelkar Committee was
constituted and when it submitted its
report, at that time also many States had
constituted such Commission. The State
List deals with work concerned with OBC
category and notifies them. Thereafter, on
the basis of Mandal Commission Report as
well many States have constituted such
Commissions. Supreme Court had also given
verdict in 1992-1993, on that ground also
many States had constituted OBC Commission
in    their   respective     territories.    At
present as many as 30-31 States have
constituted such Commissions. Complete
list of it is with me. Right to include or
remove in the States List concerned with
OBCS will remain as it is and it will not
be violated in any manner.
sentiments of Article 15 and 16, States
pertaining to making schemes in the
interest of OBC category and making
provisions in this behalf and such power
will remain as it is. We are not making
any amendment in Article 15 and Article
16. It simply means that State Commissions
will not be affected in any way by this
Constitutional amendment. Maximum number
of Hon'ble Members have shared their views
expressing their fear on this point. I,
sincerely want to make it clear that State
Governments have right and will remain as
it is in future as well. No attempt will
be made to tamper with them.”
381.   The    Bill  was   passed   in   Rajya   Sabhad  on
31.07.2017 and thereafter it was taken by the Lok
Sabha on 02.08.2017. In Lok Sabha the Minister of
Social    Justice    and    Empowerment    again   made   a
statement    that  the   Commission   will  take  decision
related to the Central List It is useful to extract
the statement(translated from Hindi) of the Minister
made on 02.08.2017 which is to the following effect:
Madam, this Commission, which will be made,
will make decisions related to the Central
List. As there is a common list related to
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe of the
State and the Centre, so is not the case
here. In it, separate list is made for Centre
as well as for States. The task of making the
list of States is done by taking decision by
the States Commission.
If any State Government proposes to include
any Caste of that State in the Central List,
then n this regard, this Commission will give
opinion,   otherwise the    opinion of      this
Commission is neither binding regarding the
State List nor the Commission will consider
it. According to my own belief, I assure you
that the report of the Central Commission
will not be binding on the subjects related
to the State, it contains such provisions.
You be assured and support this bill.”
382.     The Lok Sabha also passed the Constitution
123rd Amendment Bill, 2017 on 02.08.2018 which was
agreed to by the Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2018 and the
Constitution   (102nd  Amendment)   Act,    2018   after
receiving the assent of the President of India on
11.08.2018   was  published  on   11.08.2018   and   its
enforcement   has  been  notified   with   effect   from
inserted Article 338B and 342A and Article 366(26C)
“338B. (1) There shall be a Commission
for the socially and educationally backward
Commission for Backward Classes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law
made in this behalf by Parliament, the
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and
the conditions of service and tenure of
office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and other Members so appointed shall be such
as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
other Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the President by warrant under
his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to
regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters
relating to the safeguards provided for
the socially and educationally backward
classes under this Constitution or under
any other law for the time being in force
or under any order of the Government and
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with
respect to the deprivation of rights and
(c) to participate and advise on the socio-
economic development of the socially and
educationally backward classes and to
evaluate the progress of their development
(d) to present to the President, annually and
at such other times as the Commission may
deem fit, reports upon the working of
recommendations as to the measures that
should be taken by the Union or any State
for the effective implementation of those
safeguards and other measures for the
protection, welfare and socio-economic
educationally backward classes; and
(f)   to discharge such other functions in
relation to the protection, welfare and
development     and      advancement     of   the
socially     and     educationally       backward
classes as the President may, subject to
Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such
reports to be laid before each House of
Parliament along with a memorandum explaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken on
the recommendations relating to the Union and
the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any,
of any of such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part
thereof, relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, a copy of such
report shall be forwarded to the State
Government which shall cause it to be laid
before the Legislature of the State along
with a memorandum explaining the action taken
recommendations relating to the State and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of
any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating
any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or
inquiring into any complaint referred to in
sub-clause (b) of clause    (5), have all the
powers of a civil court trying a suit and in
particular   in respect    of the    following
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person from any part of India and
(b) requiring the discovery and production of
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy
(e) issuing commissions for the examination
(f) any other matter which the President may,
by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government
shall consult the Commission on all major
policy matters affecting the socially and
educationally backward classes.".
342A. (1) The President may with respect
to any State or Union territory, and where it
is a State, after consultation with the
Governor thereof, by public notification,
specify   the   socially   and   educationally
backward classes which shall for the purposes
of this Constitution be deemed to be socially
and   educationally    backward   classes   in
relation to that State or Union territory, as
the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or
exclude from the Central List of socially and
educationally backward classes specified in a
notification issued under clause (1) any
socially and educationally backward class,
but save as aforesaid a notification issued
under the said clause shall not be varied by
any subsequent notification.".
“366(26C) "socially and educationally
backward classes" means such backward classes
as are so deemed under article 342A for the
purposes of this Constitution;’.”
383.   After  noticing  the  principles   of  statutory
interpretation of Constitution and aids which can be
resorted to in case of any ambiguity in a word, we
now   proceed    to  look   into   the   constitutional
provisions    inserted  by   the   Constitution   (102nd
384. The first Article which has been inserted by
the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment)
Act is Article 338B. The statement of objects and
reasons of the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty
Third Amendment) Bill, 2017, we had noticed above,
in which one of the objects of the Constitutional
educationally     backward     classes     more
effectively, it is proposed to create a
National Commission for Backward Classes
with constitutional status at par with the
National Commission for Scheduled Castes
and the National Commission for Scheduled
(Underlined by us)”
385. Prior to Constitution (One Hundred and Second
Amendment), there was already existing a National
Commission for Backward Classes under the National
Commission for Backward Classes, Act, 1993(in short
1993  Act),  which   was  a   statutory    commission.  To
comprehend the role and functions of the National
Commission   for   Backward     Class   created    by  the
Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act,
we need to notice the difference into the role and
functions    of    the    statutory      commission    and
Constitutional   commission.    Section   9  of  1993  Act
provided for the functions of the Commission, which
requests for inclusion of any class of
inclusion or under-inclusion of any
backward class in such lists and tender
such advice to the Central Government as
it deems appropriate.
(2) The advice of the Commission shall
ordinarily be binding upon the Central
386. Section 11 provides for periodical revision of
the list by the Central government which is to the
“11. Periodic revision of lists by the
any time, and shall, at the expiration
force of this Act and every succeeding
undertake revision of the lists with a
backward classes or for including in
such lists new backward classes.
consult the Commission. ”
387. The Act, 1993, indicates that functions of the
Commission were confined to only examine requests
for inclusion or exclusion from the list of backward
classes. The list “was defined in Section 2C of the
Act,   1993   to  mean   the  list   for   reservation   for
appointment of backward class in the services under
the Government of India. Article 338B now inserted
provides a much larger and comprehensive role to the
Commission. The      Act, 1993 required the Commission
to   give   advice  only   to   the   Central    Government.
Article 338B now requires the Commission to give
advice both to the Central Government and to the
States, which is clear from sub-clauses (5),(7) and
(9) of Article 338B, which is quoted as below:-
matters relating to the safeguards
educationally backward classes under
this Constitution or under any other
under any order of the Government and
deprivation of rights and safeguards
(c) to participate and advise on the
socio-economic   development  of   the
socially and educationally backward
classes and to evaluate the progress
of their development under the Union
the Commission may deem fit, reports
upon the working of those safeguards;
recommendations as to the measures
implementation of those safeguards and
other measures for the protection,
welfare and socio-economic development
(f ) to discharge such other functions
in relation to the protection, welfare
and development and advancement of the
socially and educationally backward
classes as the President may, subject
Parliament, by rule specify.
(7)   Where any such report, or any part
thereof, relates to any matter with which
any State Government is concerned, a copy
of such report shall be forwarded to the
State Government which shall cause it to
be laid before the Legislature of the
State along with a memorandum explaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken
on the recommendations relating to the
recommendations.
(9) The Union and every State Government
shall consult the Commission on all major
policy matters affecting the socially and
educationally backward classes.”
388.  The  most  important  difference which  is  now
brought by Article 338B is sub-clause (9), which
mandates that every State Government to consult the
Commission on all major policy decisions affecting
socially  and  educationally  backward classes.  Sub-
clause (9) is engrafted in mandatory form by using
expression “shall”. The States thus are now bound to
consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting socially and educationally backward class.
For the purposes of this case, we need not elaborate
on the expression “policy matter” occurring in sub-
clause (9) of Article 338B. However, in the facts of
the present case, the decision of the Maharashtra
Government which culminated in 2018 Act to exceed
ceiling limit of 50 percent fixed for reservation as
per existing law and to give separate reservation to
Maratha in employment under State and in educational
institutions of the State where all policy decisions
within the meaning of clause (9) of Article 338B.
389. The word ‘consultation’ occurring in sub-clause
(9) is expression which has been used in several
Articles of the Constitution i.e. Article 124, 207,
233, 234, 320 and host of other articles. We may
notice the content and meaning of the expression
defines ‘consultation’ as follows:-
“Consultation, n.(15c) 1. The act of
someone(such as a lawyer). 2. A meeting in
which parties consult or confer. 3. Int’l
law. The interactive methods by which
disputes.-     consult,      vb.-consulting,
consultative, adj. ”
Advanced  Law  Lexicon   by  P.Ramanatha
Aiyar, 3rd Edition, defines ‘consult’:
conference of two or more persons or the
impact of two or more minds brought about
evolve a correct or atleast a satisfactory
solution. It must be directed to the
essential points of the subject under
discussion and enable the consultor to
consider the pros and cons before coming
to a decision. The consultation may be
between an uninformed person and an expert
or between two experts.”
391.   The  ‘consultation’   or   deliberation   is  not
complete or effective unless parties there to makes
their respective points of view known to the others
and examine the relative merit of their view. The
consultation is a process which requires meeting of
minds between the parties involves in the process of
consultation    on  the  material    facts  and   points
involved.   The  consultation   has  to  be meaningful,
effective   and  conscious  consultation.   We  may  now
notice few cases of this Court where the expression
‘consultation’ as occurring in the Constitution of
India has been dealt with.
392. In Chandramouleshwar Prasad versus The Patna
High Court and others, (1969) 3 SCC 56, this Court
had     occasion    to    consider     the   expression
‘consultation’ as occurring in Article 233 of the
Constitution. The Constitution Bench of this Court
explaining the expression ‘consultation’ held that
‘consultation’   is  not    an   empty   formality  and it
should be complete and effective. Following has been
laid down in paragraph 7 of the judgment: -
“7. ...Consultation with the high Court
formality. So far as promotion of officers
concerned the High Court is best fitted to
adjudge the claims and merits of persons
to be considered for promotion. The
Governor cannot discharge his function
ascertaining the High Court’s views in
regard thereto...
...Consultation or deliberation is not
complete or effective before the parties
thereto make their respective points of
view known to the other or others and
discuss and examine the relative merits of
their views. If one party makes a proposal
to the other who has a counter proposal in
his mind which is not communicated to the
proposer the direction to give effect to
the counter proposal without anything
more, cannot be said to have been issued
after consultation. In our opinion, the
notification of October 17, 1968 was not
in compliance with Article 233 of the
notification of October 17, 1968 cannot be
sustained.”
393. In Union of India versus Shankalchand Himatlal
Sheth    and    another,     (1977)    4    SCC   193,  the
Constitution Bench of this Court had occasion to
examine Article 222 and the expression ‘consult’.
Explaining     the    word    ‘consult’,      Justice  Y.V.
Chandrachud,    in   paragraphs    38   and   39  laid down
“38. In Words and Phrases (Permanent
'consult' is defined as 'to discuss
something together, to deliberate'. Corpus
Juris Secundum (Volume 16A, Ed. 1956, page
1242) also says that the word 'consult' is
frequently defined as meaning 'to discuss
something together, or to deliberate'.
Quoting Rollo v. Minister of Town and
Country     Planning(1)     and    Fletcher    v.
Minister of Town and Country Planning(2)
Third Edition, 1952, page 596) says in the
context of the expression " consultation
"Consultation means that, on the one side,
the   Minister      must    supply    sufficient
information to the local authority to
enable them to tender advice, and, on the
other hand, a sufficient opportunity must
be given to the local authority to tender
advice".     Thus,     deliberation      is   the
quintessence of consultation. That implies
considered separately on the basis of its
own facts. Policy transfers on a wholesale
basis which leave no scope for considering
the facts of each particular case and
governmental considerations are outside
the contemplation of our Constitution.
39. It may not be a happy analogy, but
it is commonsense that he who wants to
'consult' a doctor cannot keep facts up
his sleeve. He does so at his peril for he
can receive no true advice unless he
discloses facts necessary for diagnosis of
his malady. Homely analogies apart, which
can be multiplied, a decision of the
Madras High Court in R. Pushpam & Anr. v.
Stale of Madras(1) furnishes a good
parallel. section 43(b), Madras District
Municipalities Act, 1920, provided that
for the purpose of election of Councillors
Government 'after consulting the Municipal
Council' may determine the wards in which
reserved seats shall be set apart. While
setting aside the reservation made in
respect of one of the wards on the ground
that the Local Government had failed to
discharge its statutory obligation of
consulting the Municipal Council, Justice
K. Subba Rao, who then adorned the Bench
of the Madras High Court, observed : "The
word 'consult' implies a conference of two
or more persons or an impact of two or
more minds in respect of a topic in order
to enable them to evolve a correct, or at
least, a satisfactory solution." In, order
that the two minds may be able to confer
essential that each must have for its
consideration full and identical facts,
which can at once constitute both the
decision.”
Association,    U.P.   and   Others,(1993)    Supp.(1)    SCC
730,   this    Court   had    occasion    to   explain    the
expression ‘consultation’ as occurring in All India
Services    Act,   1951.   In   paragraph    26,   following
conclusions were recorded by this Court:-
“26.(1) Consultation is a process which
requires meeting of minds between the
consultation on the material facts and
points involved to evolve a correct or at
least satisfactory solution. There should
be meeting of minds between the proposer
and the persons to be consulted on the
subject of consultation. There must be
definite     facts    which    constitute     the
foundation and source for final decision.
The object of the consultation is to
render consultation meaningful to serve
the intended purpose. Prior consultation
in that behalf is mandatory.
395.   The    word   ‘consultation’     as    occurring    in
Articles     124,    216,    217    and    222    came    for
consideration before the Constitution Bench of this
Court    in    Supreme    Court    Advocates     on    Record
Association and others versus Union of India, (1993)
4 SCC 441. Justice Ratnavel Pandian delivering a
concurring opinion has elaborately dealt with the
consultation. In paragraph 112, following has been
“112.    It is clear that under Article
217(1), the process of 'consultation' by
the President is mandatory and this clause
does not speak of any discretionary
'consultation' with any other authority as
in the case of appointment of a Judge of
the Supreme Court as envisaged in Clause
'consultation' is powerful and eloquent
with    meaning,    loaded    with    undefined
questions and all the various tests
including the test of primacy to the
opinion of the CJI. This test poses many
tough questions, one of them being, what
'consultation' in the context in which it
is used under the Constitution. As in the
case of appointment of a Judge of the
Supreme Court and the High Court, there
are some more constitutional provisions in
which the expression 'consultation' is
used......”
396.    When   the  Constitutional    provision   uses  the
expression ‘consultation’ which ‘consultation’ is to
be   undertaken    by  a  Constitutional    authority  like
National     Commission   for  Backward    Classes  in  the
present     case,    the   ‘consultation’     has   to   be
meaningful,     effective   with  all   relevant  materials
and    information     placed    before    Commission.   As
observed    above,    the   National     Backward    Class
Commission   has   been   given   constitutional    status
under  Article   338B   has   now   been  entrusted   with
numerous functions regarding the backward classes.
The Commission is now to advice not only the Union
Government but the State Government also and various
measures    as   enumerated    in    sub-clause(5).    The
objective of sub-clause (9) of Article 338B is to
ensure that even the States did not take any major
policy  decision   without   consulting   the   Commission
who is competent to provide necessary advice and
solution  keeping    in  view  the   larger   interest  of
backward   class.   We   thus   are   of  the   considered
opinion that the consultation by the State on all
policy    matters     affecting     the    socially    and
educationally backward classes is now mandatory as
per sub-clause(9) of Article 338B which mandatory
requirement cannot be by-passed by any State while
the State takes any major policy decision.
397. It is true that the expression ‘consultation’
in sub-clause (4) of Article 338B is not to be read
as concurrence but as held above, ‘consultation’ has
to   be  effective    and    meaningful.  The    object   of
consultation    is  that   ‘consultee’   shall    place  the
relevant     material     before     person     from    whom
‘consultation’ is asked for and advice and opinion
given   by   consulting     authority   shall    guide   the
authority who has asked for consultation.
398. The regime which was invoked prior to insertion
of Article 342A was that central list was issued by
the   Central   Government    under  1993   Act   and  State
lists were issued by State Governments. It was also
open   for  the   State   to   request  for   exclusion   or
inclusion from the list of OBCs of Central list. The
same procedure is to issue even after insertion of
Article 342A with regard to Central list.
399. The appellants insist that Article 342A has to
be   given    a   literal    interpretation.     The   plain
language of an Article has to be given full effect
irrespective of intention of Parliament as claimed
by the Attorney General as well the learned counsel
for the State. The submission of the appellants is
that  Article   342A  borrows   the   same  scheme  as  is
delineated    in   Articles    341    and   342   of   the
Constitution. It is submitted that when Article 342A
borrows the same scheme which is clear from the fact
that sub-clause (1) of Article 342A is para mataria
with Articles 341(1) and 342(1), it is clearly meant
that power to identify educationally and socially
backward   classes   is  only  with    the President   but
after consultation with the Governor of the State.
It is submitted that expression the “socially and
educationally backward classes” which shall for the
purposes   of   this   Constitution    be  deemed   to  be
socially    and  educationally     backward   classes   in
relation to that State or Union territory” has to be
given meaning and it is only list issued by public
notification under sub-clause (1) which is the list
of backward classes of a State or Union territory.
No other list is contemplated. Hence, the State has
no authority or jurisdiction to identify backward
classes or issue any list that is so called State
List. Further interpreting sub-clause (2) of Article
342A,   it   is  submitted    that   use   of   expression
“Central List” in sub-clause (2) is only to refer
the list specified by the notification in sub-clause
(1) of Article 342A and expression Central List has
been used in the above context.
400.     Elaborating   the   argument,   it  is   further
contended that the definition given in the Article
366(26C)    which    provides     that    socially     and
educationally backward classes means such backward
classes as are so deemed under Article 342A for the
purposes   of  this   Constitution,    the  use   of   the
expression “for the purposes of this Constitution”
clearly means that it is for Articles 15 and 16
also, the list which is referred to under Article
342A  has   to  be  utilised.    The   definition    under
Article 366(26C) does not contemplate any other list
apart from list under Article 342A.
401. In contra with above interpretation put by the
petitioner,   learned   Attorney   General  and   learned
counsel for the State submit that the Constitutional
provision is to be interpreted as per the intention
of   the   Parliament    and    Parliament    having   never
intended to take away the power of the State to
identify    backward   classes    in  the   State  for   the
purpose of employment in the State, Article 342A
cannot   be   read  in   a   manner   as   claimed   by  the
appellants.    The  use   of   expression   “Central   List”
under sub-clause (2) of Article 342A is decisive
since the Parliament clearly intended to confine the
list as contemplated by Article 342A(1) as a Central
List for the purposes of employment in the Central
Government      services      and    Central     Government
organisations.
402. Primarily the language employed in a statute
and  the  Constitutional     provision    is  determinative
factor   of   legislative    intention.    The  legislative
intention opens two clues. Firstly, meaning of the
word in the provision and secondly, the purpose and
object pervading through the statutes. It is well
settled that primary rule of construction is that
the intention of the legislation must be found in
the words used by the Legislature itself. This Court
apart  from   the   above  well   settled   principles  of
statutory interpretation has laid down some further
rules    of     interpretation      to    interpret    the
constitutional provision. We may profitably refer to
a Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in State
(NCT)  of   Delhi   vs.  Union   of   India  and  another,
2018(8) SCC 501. The Constitution Bench in the above
case had occasion to interpret the Constitutional
provision of Article 239AA which was inserted by
Constitution Bench of this Court interpreted Article
239-AA    by    referring     to    principles    of   the
constitutional    objectivity,    federal   functionalism,
democracy   and  pragmatic   federalism.    Justice  Dipak
Misra, CJ, speaking for himself, A.K. Sikri and A.M.
Khanwilkar, JJ., laid down that although, primarily,
it is a literal rule which is considered to be the
norm while interpreting statutory and constitutional
provisions, yet mere allegiance to the dictionary or
literal    meaning    of    words    contained    in   the
provisions, sometimes, does not serve the purpose of
a living document. In paragraph 135 following was
instrument as dynamic as the Constitution
assumes great import in a democracy. The
constitutional courts are entrusted with
the critical task of expounding the
provisions of the Constitution and further
function, they are duty-bound to ensure
and preserve the rights and liberties of
the citizens without disturbing the very
fundamental principles which form the
foundational base of the Constitution.
Although, primarily, it is the literal
rule which is considered to be the norm
which governs the courts of law while
interpreting statutory and constitutional
provisions, yet mere allegiance to the
dictionary or literal meaning of words
contained in the provision may, sometimes,
annihilate    the   quality     of    poignant
flexibility     and    requisite      societal
progressive     adjustability.      Such     an
approach may not eventually subserve the
purpose of a living document.”
403. The Constitution Bench further observed that a
theory   of   purposive    interpretation     has   gained
importance   where   the  Courts   shall   interpret   the
Constitution in the purposive manner so as to give
effect to its intention. In paragraphs 149, 150, 155
“149. Having       stated     the    principles
relating to constitutional interpretation
we, as presently advised, think it apt to
interpretation in the context, for we
understanding the core controversy. It
reference to some precedents has to be in
juxtaposition with other concepts and
principles. As it can be gathered from the
discussion as well as the authorities
cited above, the literal rule is not to be
the primary guiding factor in interpreting
a constitutional provision, especially if
the resultant outcome would not serve the
fructification of the rights and values
expressed in the Constitution. In this
interpretation has gained importance where
Constitution in a purposive manner so as
to give effect to its true intention. The
Judicial Committee in Attorney General of
Trinidad and Tobago v. Whiteman [Attorney
Tobago v. Whiteman, (1991) 2 AC 240 :
(1991) 2 WLR 1200 (PC)] has observed: (AC
“The language of a Constitution falls
purposively, so as to give effect to its
spirit.…”
Punjab [S.R. Chaudhuri v. State of Punjab,
(2001) 7 SCC 126] , a three-Judge Bench
has opined that constitutional provisions
interpreted    with   an     object-oriented
approach and a Constitution must not be
construed in a narrow and pedantic sense.
Constituent Assembly Debates can be taken
aid of, observed the following: (SCC p.
true meaning, has to be appreciated
considering the true context in which
the same are used and the purpose which
they seek to achieve.”
interpreting constitutional provisions has
burgeoned this shift from the literal rule
to the purposive method in order that the
provisions do not remain static and rigid.
The words assume different incarnations to
adapt themselves to the current demands as
and when the need arises. The House of
Lords   in R.   (Quintavalle) v. Secy.     of
State             for             Health [R.
(Quintavalle) v. Secy.     of    State    for
: 2003 UKHL 13 (HL)] ruled: (AC p. 700,
“21. … The pendulum has swung towards
purposive methods of construction. This
teleological    approach     of    European
influence of European legal culture
generally, but it has been accelerated
classic early statement of the purposive
approach by Lord Blackburn in River
Wear      Commissioners v. Adamson[River
Wear Commissioners v. Adamson, (1877) LR
purposive   interpretation    is    not   in
doubt. The qualification is that the
influenced by the context.…”
156. Emphasising on the importance of
determining the purpose and object of a
provision,       Learned        Hand,        J.
in Cabell v. Markham [Cabell v. Markham,
148 F 2d 737 (2d Cir 1945)] enunciated:
used, even in their literal sense, are
the primary, and ordinarily the most
reliable, source of interpreting the
meaning of any writing: be it a statute,
a contract, or anything else. But it is
one of the surest indexes of a mature
and developed jurisprudence not to make
a fortress out of the dictionary; but to
remember that statutes always have some
purpose or object to accomplish, whose
sympathetic and imaginative discovery is
the surest guide to their meaning.”
404. The shift from literal rule to purposive and
objective     interpretation    of    a    constitutional
document is adopted since the Constitution is not to
be   interpreted   in  static  and   rigid    manner, the
Constitution is an organic and living document which
needs to be interpreted with cardinal principals and
objectives   of   the   Constitution.     The  shift  from
literal to purposive method of interpretation has
been   now   more     and    more,   being   adopted   for
interpreting      a    constitutional     document.    The
Constitution    Bench   in   State (NCT   of  Delhi)  case
(supra) has also noticed one more principle which is
to be applied for interpretation of a constitutional
document    that    is     constitutional    culture   and
pragmatism.    In      paragraphs    165,   166   and  169
“165. The constitutional courts, while
provisions, have to take into account the
constitutional culture, bearing in mind
its flexible and evolving nature, so that
the provisions are given a meaning which
reflect the object and purpose of the
166. History reveals that in order to
constitutional culture, the courts have
interpretation which has ushered in an era
of “constitutional pragmatism”.
169. Further, the Court also highlighted
that a balance between idealism and
pragmatism is inevitable in order to
create a workable situation ruling out any
absurdity that may arise while adopting
either one of the approaches: (Supreme
case [Supreme    Court     Advocates-on-Record
Assn. v. Union of India, (2016) 5 SCC 1] ,
SCC pp. 320-31 & 611, paras 145 & 766)
“145. … ‘468. The rule of law envisages
the area of discretion to be the minimum,
requiring only the application of known
principles or guidelines to ensure non-
arbitrariness, but to that limited extent,
discretion is a pragmatic need. Conferring
discretion upon high functionaries and,
whenever feasible, introducing the element
of plurality by requiring a collective
decision,   are     further    checks    against
arbitrariness. This is how idealism          and
Integrated to make the system workable in
a satisfactory manner.’ [Ed.: As observed
in Supreme     Court       Advocates-on-Record
Assn. v. Union of India, (1993) 4 SCC 441,
interpretation of the Constitution that
necessity of filling up every detail in
possible to do so.””
405. Justice Dipak Misra in the Constitution Bench
further laid down in paragraph 284.11:
“284.11. In the light of the contemporary
issues, the purposive method has gained
importance over the literal approach and the
constitutional courts, with the vision to
realise the true and ultimate purpose of the
Constitution not only in letter but also in
spirit and armed with the tools of ingenuity
and creativity, must not shy away from
performing this foremost duty to achieve
constitutional functionalism by adopting a
pragmatic     approach.    It   is,   in    a   way,
exposition of judicial sensibility to the
functionalism of the Constitution which we
call constitutional pragmatism. The spirit
and conscience of the Constitution should not
be lost in grammar and the popular will of
the people which has its legitimacy in a
democratic set-up cannot be allowed to lose
its purpose in simple semantics.”
406. In the above judgment the Constitution Bench
laid   down   that   the   purposive   method   has   gained
importance    over   the  literal   approach.   One    of us
(Justice     Ashok     Bhushan)    while    delivering     a
concurring    judgment     in   the    Constitution    Bench
judgment of State (NCT of Delhi) (supra) has also
laid down that the Constitutional interpretation has
to be purposive taking into consideration the need
of   time   and   constitutional     principles.    It   was
further held that the intent of Constitution Framers
and object and purpose of Constitutional amendment
always throw light on the Constitutional provisions.
Following was laid down in paragraph 537:
“537. From the above discussions, it is
apparent that constitutional interpretation
has to be purposive taking into consideration
the    need    of    time     and    constitutional
principles.     The    intent     of    Constitution
constitutional amendment always throw light
on the constitutional provisions but for
interpreting      a   particular     constitutional
provision, the constitutional scheme and the
express language employed cannot be given a
go-by.   The     purpose    and    intent   of   the
constitutional provisions have to be found
from the very constitutional provisions which
are up for interpretation. We, thus, while
interpreting Article 239-AA have to keep in
mind the purpose and object for which the
1991 was brought into force. After noticing
the above principles, we now proceed further
to examine the nature and content of the
constitutional provisions.”
407. We may also notice a seven-Judge Bench judgment
of this Court on principles of interpretation of
Constitution.    In    Abhiram    Singh     vs.    C.C.
Commachen(Dead) By Legal Representatives and others,
(2017) 2 SCC 629, Justice Madan B. Lokur, with whom
Justice  T.S.  Thakur,  CJ  and  Justice   S.A.  Bobde,
concurred  noticed  the  conflict  between   a  literal
interpretation or purposive interpretation. It was
held that interpretation has, therefore, to consider
not only the context of the law but the context in
which the law is enacted. Justice Lokur extracted
Bennion on Statutory Interpretation in paragraph 38
Interpretation[6th Edn. (Indian Reprint) p.
“General judicial adoption of the term
“purposive construction” is recent, but the
concept is not new. Viscount Dilhorne,
citing Coke, said that while it is now
construction of a statute the need for such
a construction has been recognized since
the seventeenth century. [Stock v. Frank
Jones (Tipton) Ltd., (1978) 1 WLR 231 at p.
considerable further back than that. The
difficulties over statutory interpretation
belong to the language, and there is
be anything very novel or recent about
their solution … Little has changed over
problems of verbal meaning since the Barons
of the Exchequer arrived at their famous
resolution in Heydon case [Heydon Case,
Legislation is still about remedying what
is thought to be a defect in the law. Even
the     most     “progressive”     legislator,
concerned to implement some wholly normal
concept    of   social   justice,    would   be
constrained to admit that if the existing
law accommodated the notion there would be
no need to change it. No legal need that is
408. Approving the purposive construction the Court
also held that a pragmatic view is required to be
taken   and   the   law  interpreted   purposefully. In
paragraph 39 following was observed:
different view. Ordinarily, if a statute is
well drafted and debated in Parliament
there is little or no need to adopt any
interpretation     other   than    a    literal
interpretation of the statute. However, in
a welfare State like ours, what is intended
for the benefit of the people is not fully
reflected in the text of a statute. In such
legislations, a pragmatic view is required
purposefully and realistically so that the
benefit reaches the masses. …”
409. Justice T.S. Thakur delivering his concurring
opinion in paragraph 74 held that an interpretation
which has the effect of diluting the constitutional
objective should be avoided and the purpose of the
constitution be kept in mind. In paragraphs 74, 76
“74. The upshot of the above discussion
clearly is that under the constitutional
scheme mixing religion with State power is
not permissible while freedom to practice,
profess and propagate religion of one's
choice is guaranteed. The State being
secular in character will not identify
itself with any one of the religions or
religious denominations. This necessarily
implies that religion will not play any
role in the governance of the country which
must at all times be secular in nature. The
elections to the State Legislature or to
Parliament or for that matter or any other
body in the State is a secular exercise
just as the functions of the elected
representatives must be secular in both
outlook and practice. Suffice it to say
that    the    constitutional   ethos   forbids
considerations with the secular functions
of the State. This necessarily implies that
interpretation of any statute must not
offend the fundamental mandate under the
Constitution. An interpretation which has
the effect of eroding or diluting the
constitutional objective of keeping the
religious considerations, therefore, must
be avoided. This Court has in several
interpreting    an   enactment,      the   Courts
constitutional goals and the purpose of the
accordingly.
76. Extending the above principle further
one can say that if two constructions of a
statute were possible, one that promotes the
constitutional     objective      ought    to   be
preferred over the other that does not do so.
77. To somewhat similar effect is the
Karnataka v. Appa     Balu      Ingale[State     of
Karnataka v. Appa Balu Ingale, 1995 Supp (4)
SCC 469 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1762] wherein this
transforming the nation's life, the Court
should respond to the nation's need and
interpret the law with pragmatism to further
public welfare and to make the constitutional
animations a reality. The Court held that
constitutional goals and remind themselves of
the purpose of the        Act while interpreting
any legislation. The Court said: (SCC p. 486,
“35. The     Judges,     therefore,      should
respond to the human situations to meet
the felt necessities of the time and
social needs, make meaningful the right
legislature. This Court as the vehicle of
transforming the nation's life should
interpret the law with pragmatism to
constitutional    animations    a    reality.
Common sense has always served in the
court's ceaseless striving as a voice of
reason to maintain the blend of change
and continuity of order which is sine qua
change in a parliamentary democracy. In
interpreting the Act, the Judge should be
cognizant to and always keep at the back
of his/her mind the constitutional goals
and the purpose of the Act and interpret
the provisions of the Act in the light
thus shed to annihilate untouchability;
to accord to the Dalits and the Tribes
fraternity a reality.””
410. Applying the above principles laid down by the
Constitution Benches of this Court on interpretation
of a Constitution, in the fact of the present case,
we need to discern the intention of Parliament in
inserting Article 342A. We have already found that
reports   of  the  Parliamentary    Committee    and  the
statement made by the Minister while moving the Bill
are   relevant    aids    for    a    construction     of
constitutional     provision.      The     Parliamentary
Committee report makes it clear that after obtaining
the   clarification     from    the   Ministry     that   the
Constitutional     Amendment   is  not   intended    to  take
away the right of identification of backward class
from a State. It submitted its report to the effect
that  rights    of  State   Backward   Classes    Commission
shall     continue    unhindered.      The     Parliamentary
Standing    Committee   further   noticed    that   the  list
which is contemplated under Article 342A is only
Central    List    of   the   backward     classes    for   a
particular State for the purposes of services under
the Government of India and its organizations.
411.   We   have   further   noticed    the   statement    of
Minister of Social, Justice and Empowerment, made
both  in   Rajya   Sabha  and   Lok  Sabha.    The   Minister
stated the task of preparing list of the State of
the   Backward     Classes    is   taken    by    the   State
Commission and the amendment shall have no effect on
the right of the State and State Backward Classes
Commission to identify the backward classes. We have
extracted above the relevant statement of Minister
in the foregoing paragraphs.
412. We may further notice that the above statement
was   made  by   the  Minister    of   Social    Justice   and
Empowerment in the background of several members of
the  Parliament    expressing    their   apprehension     that
the   Constitution    102nd   Amendment    shall   take   away
rights of the States to identify backward classes in
each   State.   The   Minister    of   Social    Justice   and
Empowerment for allaying their apprehension made a
categorical     statement      that    the    Constitutional
Amendment shall not affect the power of the State,
the State Backward Classes Commission to identify
the backward classes in the State.
413.      Learned Attorney General for India in his
submission has referred to the statement of Minister
of   Social   Justice    and    Empowerment     as   well   as
Parliamentary     Select     Committee     report    and   has
emphasised    that   the    Parliamentary     intention    was
never   to  take   away  the    rights   of   the  States   to
identify    backward    classes     in    their    respective
States. Learned Attorney General has referred to and
relied on the Union's stand taken in Writ Petition
(C) No.12 of 2021-Dinesh B. vs. Union of India &
Ors.,   where   the   stand  of   the   Union   on   the
Constitution   (102nd Amendment)  Act,  2018   was  made
clear in paragraph 11. We extract paragraph 11 of
the above affidavit relied by the learned Attorney
General which is to the following effect:
"11.That, from the above, it is evident
that the power to identify and specify the
SEBCs lies with Parliament, only with
reference to the Central List of SEBCs. The
State Governments may have their separate
State Lists of SEBCs for the purpose of
providing reservation in recruitment to
State Government services or admission in
State Government educational institutions.
The castes/communities included in such
State Lists of SEBCs may differ from the
castes/communities included in the Central
List of SEBCs. It is submitted that the
inclusion or exclusion of any caste or
community in the State List of SEBCs is the
subject of the concerned State Government
and the Government of India has no role in
the matter.”
414.   It   is,   thus,  clear   as   sun   light   that
Parliamentary    intention  discernible    from   Select
Committee report and statement of Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment is that the intention of the
Parliament for bringing Constitutional amendment was
not to take away the power of the State to identify
backward class in the State.
415.   The    Parliamentary   intention    was   further
discernible that the list which was contemplated to
be issued by President under Article 342A was only
the Central List which was to govern the services
under  the   Government  of   India   and  organisations
under    the    Government    of    India.    When   the
Parliamentary     intention     is    discernable    and
admissible as aid to statutory interpretation, we
see no reason not to        interpret Article 342A in
manner  as   per   the  intention   of   the  Parliament
noticed above.
416. We also need to reflect on the submission of
petitioner that the scheme under Article 342A has to
be interpreted in accordance with already existing
scheme under Articles 341 and 342. There is no doubt
that the Constitutional scheme under Article 342A
(1) and those of Article 341(1) and 342(1) are same
but there is a vast difference between the list of
SC and ST as contemplated by Articles 341 and 342 of
those of backward classes which now is contemplated
under Article 342A.
417. The concept of Scheduled Castes was well known
even  before   the  enforcement    of   the   Constitution.
There was already Scheduled Castes list in existence
when the Constitution was enforced. We may refer to
Government    of   India   Act,    1935,    Schedule    (1),
paragraph 26 which defines the Scheduled Castes in
“26.-(1) In the foregoing provisions of
this Schedule the following expressions
have the meanings hereby assigned to them,
castes, races or tribes or parts of or
groups within castes, races or tribes,
being castes, races, tribes, parts or
groups which appear to His Majesty in
Council to correspond to the classes of
persons formerly known as "the depressed
classes", as His Majesty in Council may
specify; and…”
418.   The  Government   of  India    has   also  issued   a
Scheduled Castes List under the Government of India
framers were, thus, well aware with the concept of
Scheduled Casts and Scheduled Tribes and hence the
same  scheme    regarding     SC   was    continued     in  the
Constitution     by    way   of     Article     341    of   the
419. The expression 'backward class' does not find
place  in   the  Government     of   India   Act,    1935.  The
Constitution    framers     recognising       that     backward
classes of citizens need affirmative action by the
State  to   bring   them   in    the   main   stream    of  the
society   has   engrafted      a   special     provision    for
backward classes. Under Article 16(4) the State was
empowered to make any provision for reservation of
appointment or posts in favour of any backward class
of citizens not adequately represented in services.
When the Constitution empowers the State to make any
provision, the provision may embrace all aspects of
measures   including    identification      of   the   backward
classes. The Constitution Bench of this Court in
Indra   Sawhney    has   accepted     and   recognised     this
position.   It is both the States and Union who are
entitled to identify backward classes of citizens
and  to  take   measures.   Indra   Sawhney    had,   thus,
issued  directions   to  Union  as   well   as   States  to
constitute permanent body for identification and for
taking necessary measures. The power to identify the
backward classes was with the State and there are no
intentions that the power of the State as occurring
in Articles 15(4) and 16(4) in any manner has been
taken  away   by  the   Constitutional    amendment.    The
power given to the State under Articles 15(4) and
16(4) are for the benefit of backward classes of
citizens. Any limitation or limitation of such power
cannot be readily inferred and has to be expressly
provided by the Constitution.     The submission of the
petitioner   that   Article   342A    which    relates   to
socially and educationally backward class should be
read  in  the   Constitutional   scheme    as   delineated
under   Articles   341   and   342,    thus,    cannot   be
accepted.
420. Now, we come to the expression “Central List”
as occurring in Article 342A (2). In pursuance of
the direction issued by the Constitution Bench of
this   Court  in  Indra    Sawhney,   the Parliament  has
enacted the National Commission for Backward Classes
Act, 1993. Section 2(c) of the Act defines 'lists'
prepared by the Government of India from
appointments or posts in favour of backward
classes of citizens which, in the opinion
of that Government, are not adequately
represented in the services under the
Government of India and any local or other
authority within the territory of India or
under the control of the Government of
421. Section 9 of the Act defines the functions of
the Commission. Section 9 provides as follows:
“9. Functions of the Commission.–(1) The
Commission    shall    examine    requests   for
inclusion of any class of citizens as a
backward class in the lists and hear
complaints   of    over-inclusion    or   under-
inclusion of any backward class in such
lists and tender such advice to the Central
Government as it deems appropriate.
(2) The advice of the Commission shall
ordinarily be binding upon the Central
422. The National Commission for Backward Classes
Act, 1993 clearly indicates that the Parliamentary
enactment    was   related    to   services    under   the
Government of India and the Act, 1993 was not to
govern    or  regulate    identification     of   backward
classes by the concerned State. The States had also
enacted   “State   Legislation”   constituting    Backward
Classes   Commission.   In  the  State  of   Maharashtra,
Maharashtra State Backward Classes Commission, act
was   enacted  in   2005.  Along  with   passing    of the
Constitution 102nd Amendment, the National Commission
for Backward Classes (Repeal) Act, 2018 was passed
which received the assent of the President of India
on 14.08.2018. We may notice Section 2 of the Repeal
Act which is to the following effect:
"Section2.(1) The     National Commission for
Backward    Classes   Act,   1993    is    hereby
repealed and the National Commission for
Backward Classes constituted under sub-
section (1) of section 3 of the said Act
shall stand dissolved.
Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993
(i) the previous operation of the Act
so repealed or anything duly done or
(ii) any right, privilege, obligation
incurred under the Act so repealed, or
(iii) any penalty, confiscation or
incurred in respect of any contravention
respect of any such right, privilege,
confiscation or punishment as aforesaid,
and any such proceeding or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced, and
punishment may be imposed or made as if
that Act had not been repealed.
423. The National Commission for Backward Classes by
the Constitutional 102nd Amendment was, thus, given
constitutional    status     which was  available   to  the
Commission    which   as   a  statutory  Commission   under
1993 enactment.
The Parliamentary Select Committee report dated
17.07.2017    and   the   Minutes   of  the  Parliamentary
Standing   Committee   as  referred    to   and   extracted
above indicates that it was well known that there
are  two   lists  of  Backward   Classes,     one  “Central
List”    and    other   ”State     List”.      During   the
Parliamentary Committee report it was clarified and
expressed that Constitutional amendment is only with
regard   to   “Central   List”   which     expression   was
expressly   included   in  sub-clause     (2)   of  Article
424. We may also look into the use of expression
“Central List” under Article 342A in contradiction
to the words, “list of Scheduled Castes”, “list of
Scheduled Tribes” as occurring in Articles 341(2)
and 342(2) which are to following effect:
President may with respect to any State or
Union territory, and where it is a State ,
after    consultation    with    the     Governor
thereof, by public notification, specify
the castes, races or tribes or parts of or
groups within castes, races or tribes which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution
relation to that State or Union territory,
as the case may be.
may with respect to any State or Union
territory, and where it is a State, after
consultation with the Governor thereof, by
public notification, specify the tribes or
tribal communities or parts of or groups
within tribes or tribal communities which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution
relation to that State or Union territory,
as the case may be.”
425.     Article   341(1)   uses   expression   'Scheduled
Castes' and the same expression finds place in sub-
clause (2) when the sub-clause (2) of the Article
uses expression “list of Scheduled Castes” specified
in notification. Similarly, Article 342(2) also uses
expression 'list of Scheduled Tribes' specified in
the notification.
426. Article 342A(2) uses an extra word “Central”
before    the  expression     'List'   of   socially   and
educationally    backward   classes.   If   it  is  to  be
accepted that the constitutional scheme of Articles
341   and  342  was   to  be   followed   and  carried  in
Article 342A also, the same expression, which was
necessary   to  be  used   i.e.  “list   of  socially  and
educationally backward classes” which use would have
been in line of the expression occurring in Article
341(2) and 342(2). It is, thus, clear that an extra
word, namely, 'Central' has been added in Article
342(2) before the expression 'list of socially and
educationally backward classes'. When the statute or
Constitution uses an additional word it has to be
presumed that the use of additional word is for a
purpose   and  object  and it  is  not   superfluous  or
redundant.
427. While interpreting a constitutional provision,
no   word   shall   be  treated   as   superfluous   and
redundant. We have noticed above that the list for
services in the Government of India was Central List
which was being prepared prior to the Constitution
Amendment, under Act, 1993.
428. We may also deal with the submission of the
petitioner that the word 'Central List' was used in
sub-clause (2) of Article 342A to refer the public
notification specifying the socially educationally
backward classes issued by the President of India
under   sub-clause   (1).   The  expression    “list  of
socially    and    educationally    backward    classes'
specified in notification under       sub-clause (1) is
already   there  under  sub-clause   (2)  which  clearly
meant and referred to notification issued under sub-
clause (1), hence, there was no necessity for use of
an additional word 'Central' in sub-clause (1) which
was wholly superfluous and redundant. We are of the
view that the word 'Central' was used for a purpose
and object, the use of the 'Central' was only with
the intent to limit the list issued by the President
to Central services. Sub-clause (1) of Article 342
and sub-clause (2) of Article 342A has to be given
harmonious    construction   and   we   read  both   the
Articles together to find out purpose and intent of
the list issued by the President under sub-clause
(1). It is the 'Central List' which could be amended
by the Parliament by exercising power under sub-
clause (2) of Article 342A.
429.      A question may be asked that when under 1993
Act “Central List” was prepared by Government of
India and the “State list” was prepared by States,
what    was   the    necessity   to  bring    the    102nd
Constitutional Amendment if the same regime of two
lists i.e. “Central list” and “State list” was to
continue? For answering the question we first look
into   the  1993   Act  to  understand   the  nature   of
exercise undertaken under the Act regarding “Central
List” and change in the exercise, if any, after 102 nd
430. We have already noticed Section 2(c) and 9 of
1993 Act. We may also notice Section 11 of 1993 Act
“11. Periodic revision of lists by the
Government may at any time, and shall, at
the expiration of ten years from the coming
into force of this Act and every succeeding
period of ten years thereafter, undertake
excluding from such lists those classes who
have ceased to be backward classes or for
including    in   such   lists  new   backward
classes. (2) The Central Government shall,
while undertaking any revision referred to
431. Section 2(c), 9 and 11 makes it clear that list
prepared by the Central Government from time to time
for reservation of appointments or posts in favour
of   backward   classes   in  the   services   under   the
Government    of   India   and   any    local   or   other
authority, within the territory of India or under
the control of Government of India was an statutory
exercise of the Government of India under the 1993
Act. All the lists which were issued after 1993 Act
by the Government of India were by executive orders
issued from time to time. For what purpose, 102nd
Constitutional Amendment was made? Answer is not for
to seek.
432. Under the Government of India Act, 1935, the
list of “the Scheduled Castes” was to be specified
by   His  Majesty  in   Council  as   per  clause  26   of
Schedule I of the Government of India Act, 1935,
which   was  also  an  executive   function.   The   legal
regime of the list of Scheduled caste saw a sea
change under the Constitution of India as reflected
in Article 341 and 342. What was the change brought
by   Constitution   of   India   regarding   the   list  of
Scheduled Caste can be well understood when we look
into   the  debates   of  the   Constituent    Assembly  on
Draft Articles 300A and 300B which corresponds to
Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution of India.
433. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar moving the Amendment briefly
outlined     the    object     and     purpose    of    the
Constitutional      provisions      in    debates     dated
"...The object of these two articles, as
I stated, was to eliminate the necessity of
burdening the Constitution with long lists
of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
It is now proposed that the President, in
consultation with the Governor or Ruler of
a State should have the power to issue a
general     notification     in    the    Gazette
specifying all the Castes and tribes or
groups thereof deemed to be Scheduled
Castes    and   Scheduled     Tribes    for    the
purposes of the privileges which have been
defined for them in the Constitution. The
only limitation that has been imposed is
this: that once a notification has been
consultation with and on the advice of the
Government of each State, thereafter, if
any elimination was to be made from the
List so notified or any addition was to be
made, that must be made by Parliament and
not by the President. The object is to
eliminate any kind of political factors
disturbance in the Schedule so published by
the President.”
434. The main object of the Constitutional provision
was  to  “eliminate   any  kind  of   political   factors
having a play in the matter of the disturbance in
the Scheduled so published by the President.”
435. We have to read the same objective for change
of the statutory regime of backward class under 1993
Act into Constitutional regime by Article 342A. To
eliminate any kind of political factor to play with
regard   to   list   of   backward   class    issued   by
Government of India from time to time under 1993
Act, the Constitution Amendment was brought as was
brought by Constituent Assembly by Draft Article 341
and 342. Now, by virtue of Article 342A, the list
once issued by the President under Article 342A(1)
cannot   be    tinkered   with    except   by    way   of
Parliamentary   enactment.   Thus,  the  above   was  the
objective of the Constitutional Amendment and not
the taking away the power of the States to identify
the    Backward    Class    in  State   with    regard   to
reservation for employment in the State services and
reservation     in   educational    institution     in  the
States.    A   laudable    objective   of    keeping   away
political pressure in amending the list of Backward
class issued by President once has been achieved,
hence,     it    cannot    be   said    that    the    102nd
Constitutional Amendment was without any purpose if
the power of State to identify Backward classes in
their State was to remain as it is.
436. The above also sufficiently explain the stand
taken by Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment
on the floor of House. The Minister clarified that
the Constitutional Amendment is not to take away the
power of the State to identify the Backward Classes
in   the  State   for  purposes   of  the   State  and  was
confined to “Central List” which was being prepared
by the Government of India as in earlier regime.
Learned     Attorney     General    in    his    submission
forcefully     carried     the   same   stand     regarding
interpretation of Article 342A. We see no reason to
reject the submission of learned Attorney General
for India and learned senior counsel appearing for
the States that the 102nd Constitutional Amendment
was not intended to take away the power of the State
regarding    identification    of    Backward    Class   for
services in the State or educational institutions in
the State.
437.   We   also  need  to   reflect    on   definition   of
socially    and  educationally      backward    classes   as
occurring in Article 366(26C). Article 366 is the
definition clause of the Constitution. Article 366
“366. Definition in this Constitution,
unless the context otherwise requires, the
following expressions have as, the meanings
hereby respectively assigned to them, .....”
‘(26C)    "socially      and     educationally
backward    classes"    means    such     backward
classes as are so deemed under article 342A
for the purposes of this Constitution;’.”
438. When we look into the definition as inserted by
Article    366(26C),   it   is   clear    that    definition
provides   that  socially   and   educationally     backward
class   means   such  backward   classes    as  are  deemed
under    Article   342A   for   the    purposes   of    this
Constitution. When we have interpreted Article 342A
to mean that Article 342A refers to 'Central List'
which is prepared for services under the Government
of India and organisations under the Government of
India, the definition given under Article 366(26C)
which specifically refer to Article 342A has to be
read together and list of backward classes which is
not   Central   List  shall   not   be   governed   by   the
definition under Article 366(26C). Since, the 26C
has been inserted in the context of Article 342A, if
the context is list prepared by the State and it is
State List, definition under (26C) shall not govern.
Article 366(26C), thus, has to be read contextually
with Article 342A and for no other purpose.
439. The interpretation which we have put on Article
342A is in full accord with intention of the framers
of   the   Constitution.   Dr.   B.R.    Ambedkar   in   the
Constituent    Assembly   had   said    that   a   backward
community    is   to   be  determined     by   each    local
Government. The determination, i.e., identification
of the backward classes was, thus, left to the local
Government as was clearly and categorically stated
by Dr. Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly debates.
It is most relevant for the present discussion to
quote the exact words used by Dr. Ambedkar while
answering the debate on draft sub-clause, Article
10(3)    which   is  Article    16(4)    of   the   present
"Somebody asked me: “What is a backward
community”? Well, I think anyone who reads
the language of the draft itself will find
that we have left it to be determined by each
local Government. A backward community is a
community which is backward in the opinion of
the Government.”
440.   The  framers   of  the   Constitution,    thus,  had
contemplated that determination of backward class as
occurring    in  draft   Article    10(3),   i.e,   present
Article 16(4) is to be done by the local Government.
The   constitutional    scheme,    thus,   was  framed   in
accordance    with  the   above   background.   After   the
Constitution, it is for the last 68 years backward
class was being identified by the respective State
Governments and they were preparing their respective
lists and granting reservation under Articles 15(4)
and 16(4) as per their decision. The Constitution
Bench of Indra Sawhney did recognise and held that
each State Government is fully competent to identify
backward classes and this is why the Indra Sawhney
directed for appointment of a permanent body both by
the Union as well as by the State and consequently
Commissions    were    constituted    National    Backward
Classes   Commission     and   State   Backward    Classes
Commission.   To   reverse   the  entire   constitutional
scheme regarding identification of backward classes
by the State which was continuing in the last 68
years,   a    clear     and    explicit    Constitutional
Amendment,   was    necessary.   There   is   no   express
indication in the 102nd Constitutional Amendment that
the  power  of   the  State   is  being  taken   away  for
identification of the backward classes.
441. We are not persuaded to interpret Article 342A
against the intention of the Parliament which is
reflected in the Parliamentary Committee report and
the statement made by the Minister on the floor of
the  House.   The   statement    of   the   Minister    on  the
floor of the House was clear and categorical, we
cannot   put    an   interpretation       which    was    never
intended   by   the    Parliament     and   which    may   have
serious consequences with the rights of the States
which  neither     Parliament    intended     nor  wanted    to
bring. We, thus, hold that Article 342A was brought
by    Constitution        102nd     Amendment       to     give
constitutional status to National Backward Classes
Commission    and   for   publication      of   list   by   the
President   of   socially    and    educationally     backward
classes which was to be Central List for governing
employment    under     Government     of    India    and   the
organisations     under   it.    The   expression     'Central
List' used in sub-clause (2) of Article 342A has
been used for the purpose and object which cannot be
ignored nor lost sight. The definition clause under
Article 366(26C) has to be read contextually with
Article  366(26C)     which   is   referred    under   Article
366(2C) itself. Thus, the definition is relevant in
the context of 'Central List' and the definition is
not governing to list prepared by the State which
was not under contemplation in Article 342A.
442. We do not find any merit in the challenge to
the Constitution 102nd    Amendment. The Constitution
102nd Amendment does not violate any basic feature of
the   Constitution.   The   argument   of   the   learned
counsel for the petitioner is that Article 368 has
not   been   followed  since   the   Constitution    102 nd
Amendment was not ratified by the necessary majority
of the State. The Parliament never intended to take
the rights of the State regarding identification of
backward classes, the Constitution 102nd        Amendment
was not covered by Proviso to Article 368 sub-clause
(2),    hence,   the   same   did    not   require    any
ratification. The argument of procedural violation
in passing the 102nd Constitutional Amendment cannot
also be accepted. We uphold the Constitution 102nd
Amendment interpreted in the manner as above.
443. The High Court in the impugned judgment has
correctly     interpreted    the   Constitution      102nd
Amendment and the opinion of the High Court that the
Constitution 102nd Amendment does not take away the
legislative competence of Maharashtra Legislature is
correct and we approve the same.
444. From our foregoing discussion and finding we
(1) The greatest common measure of agreement in
six   separate   judgments  delivered  in   Indra
(i)Reservation under Article 16(4) should not
exceed 50%.
(ii)For  exceeding  reservation  beyond  50%,
extra-ordinary  circumstances  as  indicated
in paragraph 810 of Justice Jeevan Reddy
should exist for which extreme caution is
to be exercised.
(2) The 50% rule spoken in Balaji and affirmed
in Indra Sawhney is to fulfill the objective of
equality as engrafted in Article 14 of which
Articles   15  and   16   are  facets.  50%  is
reasonable and it is to attain the object of
equality. To change the 50% limit is to have a
society which is not founded on equality but
based on caste rule.
(3) We are of the considered opinion that the
cap on percentage of reservation as has been
laid down by Constitution Bench in Indra Sawhney
is with the object of striking a balance between
the rights under Article 15(1) and 15(4) as well
as  Articles    16(1)  and  16(4)  . The  cap on
percentage is to achieve principle of equality
and with the object to strike a balance which
cannot be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable.
(4)   Providing reservation for advancement of
any socially and educationally backward class in
public services is not the only means and method
for improving the welfare of backward class. The
State ought to bring other measures including
providing educational facilities to the members
of backward class free of cost giving concession
in  fee,   providing    opportunities   for   skill
development to enable the candidates from the
backward class to be self-reliant.
(5) There   can   be   no  quarrel   that   society
changes, law changes, people changes but that
does not mean that something which is good and
proven to be beneficial in maintaining equality
in the society should also be changed in the
name of change alone.
(6)  When   the   Constitution    Bench   in   Indra
Sawhney   held   that   50%   is   upper  limit   of
reservation under Article 16(4), it is the law
which is binding under Article 141 and to be
implemented.
(7)  We find that the Constitution Bench judgment
in  Indra  Sawhney   is  also  fully  applicable  in
reference to Article 15(4) of the Constitution
of India.
(8)  The setting aside of 50% ceiling by eleven-
Judge Bench in T.M.A. Pai Foundation case as was
laid down by St. Stephen’s case i.e. 50% ceiling
in admission in aided Minority Instructions has
no bearing on the principle of 50% ceiling laid
down    by   Indra    Sawhney    with    respect   to
reservation. The judgment of T.M.A. Pai was in
reference to rights of minority under Article 30
and   is   not  relevant   for    Reservation   under
Articles 16(4) and 15(4) of the Constitution.
Act, 2000 by which sub-clause (4B) was inserted
in Article 16 makes it clear that ceiling of 50%
“has now received constitutional recognition”.
(10)   We fully endorse the submission of Shri
Rohtagi that extraordinary situations indicated
in  paragraph   810   were  only   illustrative   and
cannot be said to be exhaustive. We however do
not agree with Mr. Rohtagi that paragraph 810
provided only a geographical test. The use of
expression “on being out of the main stream of
national   life”,  is  a  social   test,  which  also
needs to be fulfilled for a case to be covered
by exception.
(11)   We do not find any substance in any of the
10 grounds urged by Shri Rohatgi and Shri Kapil
Sibal for revisiting and referring the judgment
of Indra Sawhney to a larger Bench.
(12) What was held by the Constitution Bench in
Indra Sawhney on the relevance and significance
of the principle of stare decisis clearly binds
us. The judgment of Indra Sawhney has stood the
test of the time and has never been doubted by
any  judgment  of  this  Court.   The   Constitution
Bench judgment of this Court in Indra Sawhney
neither needs to be revisited nor referred to a
larger Bench for consideration.
(13) The Constitution Bench in M. Nagaraj does
not  contain  any   ratio   that   ceiling    of  50%
reservation   may    be    exceeded     by    showing
quantifiable   contemporary    data    relating    to
backwardness.   The   Commission    has    completely
misread   the   ratio    of  the   judgment,   when   the
Commission     took     the    view     that    on    the
quantifiable     data     ceiling    of   50%    can   be
breached.
(14) The   Commission     and  the   High  Court    found
existence of the extra-ordinary situations with
regard to exceeding 50% ceiling in respect to
grant of separate reservation to Maratha because
the   population    of   backward   class   is  80%   and
reservation limit is only 50%, containing the
Maratha in         pre-existing reservation for OBC
circumstances    is    not   covered   under   the   para
meters   indicated     in   Indra   Sawhney’s   case   as
extra-ordinary      circumstance      to   breach     50%
ceiling.
(15)   We   have    found    that   no   extraordinary
circumstances were made out in granting separate
reservation of Maratha Community by exceeding
the 50    per cent ceiling limit of reservation.
The Act, 2018 violates the principle of equality
as    enshrined in Article 16. The exceeding of
ceiling limit without there being any extra-or-
dinary     circumstances clearly violates Article
14 and 16 of the Constitution which makes the
enactment ultra vires.
(16)   The   proposition    is    well   settled   that
Commissions’ reports are to be looked into with
deference.   However,   one    of   the  parameter   of
scrutiny of Commission’s report as approved by
this Court is that on the basis of data and
materials   referred   to   in   the   report   whether
conclusions    arrived    by    the   Commission    are
justified.
(17) The measures taken under Article 15(4) and
16(4) can be examined as to whether they violate
any   constitutional     principle,      and   are   in
conformity with the rights under Article 14, 15
and  16  of   the  Constitution.     The   scrutiny  of
measures taken by the State, either executive or
legislative,    thus,  has   to    pass  test   of  the
constitutional scrutiny.
(18) The word ‘adequate’ is a relative term used
in relation to representation of different caste
and   communities      in   public     employment.    The
objective    of   Article   16(4)    is   that   backward
class   should   also   be   put   in   main   stream  to
enable    to    share    power    of    the    State   by
affirmative     action.    To    be   part    of   public
service, as accepted by the Society of today, is
to  attain    social   status    and   play   a  role  in
governance.
(19)   We   have    examined   the    issues    regarding
representation of Marathas in State services on
the basis of facts and materials compiling by
Commission and obtained from States and other
sources.    The    representation      of   Marathas   in
public services in Grade A, B, C and D comes to
33.23%, 29.03%, 37.06% and 36.53% computed from
out   of  the    open   category     filled    posts,  is
adequate    and    satisfactory     representation     of
Maratha community. One community bagging such
number of posts in public services is a matter
representation in no manner can be said to not
adequate in public services.
(20)     The    Constitution       pre-condition     for
providing    reservation    as   mandated   by   Article
16(4)    is   that   the    backward    class   is   not
adequately represented in the public services.
The Commission labored under misconception that
unless    Maratha   community     is  not   represented
equivalent     to   its    proportion,     it   is   not
adequately represented.
Indra Sawhney has categorically held that what
is    required    by    the    State    for   providing
reservation      under    Article     16(4)    is    not
proportionate      representation       but    adequate
(21) The constitutional precondition as mandated
by Article 16(4) being not fulfilled with regard
to Maratha class, both the Gaikwad Commission’s
report     and    consequential      legislation      are
unsustainable.
(22)    We   having    disapproved      the   grant    of
reservation     under   Article     16(4)   to   Maratha
community, the said decision becomes relevant
and shall certainly have effect on the decision
of the Commission holding Maratha to be socially
and    educationally     backward.     Sufficient     and
adequate representation of Maratha community in
public services is indicator that they are not
socially and educationally backward.
From   the   facts   and   figures   as   noted   by
Gaikwad    Commission     in   its   report    regarding
representation of Marathas in public services,
the   percentage    of   Marathas    in   admission    to
Engineering,      Medical      Colleges     and     other
disciplines,     their    representation     in   higher
academic    posts,    we   are    of   the   view    that
conclusion     drawn   by    the   Commission    is   not
supportable from the data collected. The data
collected and tabled by the Commission as noted
in the report clearly proves that Marathas are
not socially and educationally backward class.
(23) The elementary principle of interpreting
the Constitution or statute is to look into the
words used in the statute, when the language is
clear, the intention of the Legislature is to
be gathered from the language used. The aid to
interpretation is resorted to only when there
is some ambiguity in words or expression used
in   the    statute.     The   rule    of   harmonious
construction,     the   rule   of    reading   of   the
provisions    together    as  also    rule  of   giving
effect to the purpose of the statute, and few
other principles of interpretation are called
in  question     when   aids   to   construction    are
necessary in    particular context.
(24)The shift from literal rule to purposive
constitutional     document   is  adopted   since   the
Constitution is not to be interpreted in static
and   rigid    manner,    the   Constitution    is   an
organic and living document which needs to be
interpreted    with    cardinal     principals   and
objectives of the Constitution.       The shift from
literal to purposive method of interpretation
has been now more and more, being adopted for
interpreting a constitutional document.
(25)The law is well settled in this county that
Parliamentary Committee reports including speech
given  by  the   Minister   in  the   Parliament  are
relevant materials to ascertain the intention of
Parliament    while     construing     constitutional
provisions.
(26) We are of the considered opinion that the
consultation by the State on all policy matters
affecting    the    socially    and     educationally
backward classes is now mandatory as per sub-
clause(9)   of    Article   338B    which   mandatory
requirement   cannot   be  by-passed    by any  State
while the State takes any major policy decision.
Sub-clause     (9)   of  Article    338B   uses   the
expression ‘consultation’. It is true that the
expression ‘consultation’ is not to be read as
concurrence    but    the   ‘consultation’     has   to  be
effective     and     meaningful.      The     object    of
consultation is that ‘consultee’ shall place the
relevant     material     before    person     from    whom
‘consultation’      is   asked    for   and   advice    and
opinion    given    by   consulting     authority     shall
guide    the     authority      who    has     asked    for
consultation.
(27)   It   is,   thus,    clear   as   sun    light   that
Parliamentary intention discernible from Select
Committee report and statement of Minister of
Social    Justice    and    Empowerment     is   that   the
intention     of    the     Parliament     for    bringing
Constitutional amendment was not to take away
the  power    of   the   State   to   identify    backward
class in the State.
(28)   When    the   Parliamentary      intention    is
discernable and admissible as aid to statutory
interpretation,     we   see    no   reason    not   to
interpret   Article   342A   in  manner    as  per  the
intention of the Parliament noticed above.
(29)  We are of the view that word ‘Central’ in
Article   342A   (2)   was   used   for   purpose   and
object. The use of ‘Central’ was only with the
intent to limit the list issued by the President
to Central services. It is well settled rule of
interpretation    that  no   word  in   a   statute  or
Constitution is used without any purpose. Word
‘Central’ has to be given meaning and purpose.
(30) When we have interpreted Article 342A to
mean that Article 342A refers to 'Central List'
which   is   prepared    for    services    under   the
Government of India and organisations under the
Government of India, the definition given under
Article  366(26C)    which   specifically     refer  to
Article 342A has to be read together and list of
backward classes which is not Central List shall
not be governed by the definition under Article
366(26C). Since, the (26C) has been inserted in
the context of Article 342A, if the context is
list prepared by the State and it is State List,
definition under (26C) shall not govern.
(31)  We,  thus,   hold  that   Article   342A  was
brought by Constitution 102nd Amendment to give
constitutional   status   to   National    Backward
Classes Commission and for publication of list
by the President of socially and educationally
backward classes which was to be Central List
for  governing  employment   under  Government   of
India and the organisations under it.
does  not  violate   any  basic   feature   of  the
Constitution.   We   uphold   the   constitutional
validity of Constitution (One Hundred and second
In   view   of  the    foregoing   discussions    and
conclusions, we decide all the Civil Appeals and
Writ Petitions in this batch of cases in following
(1) C.A.No.3123 of 2020 and other civil appeals
challenging the impugned judgment of the High
Court dated 27.06.2019 are allowed. The im-
pugned  judgment    of  the   High   Court   dated
27.06.2019 is set aside. The writ petitions
filed by the       appellants in the High Court
are allowed with following effect:
(a) Section 2(j) of the Act, 2018 insofar as
it declares Maratha community Education-
ally and Socially Backward Category is
held to be    ultra vires to the Constitu-
tion and struck down.
(b)  Section 4(1)(a) of Act, 2018 as amended
reservation under Article 15(4) to the
educational institutions including       pri-
vate institutions whether aided or un-
aided by the State, other than minority
educational    institutions,     is   declared
ultra   vires   to   the  Constitution     and
struck down.
(c) Section 4(1)(b) of Act, 2018 as amended
by Act, 2019 granting reservation of 13%
to the Maratha community of the total
appointments    in  direct   recruitment    in
public   services   and   posts     under  the
State, is held to be ultra vires to the
Constitution and struck down.
(d) That admissions insofar as Postgraduate
Medical Courses which were already held
not to affect by order dated 09.09.2020,
judgment. Hence, those students who have
already   been   admitted  in    Postgraduate
Medical    Courses   prior    to    09.09.2020
shall be allowed to continue.
(e) The admissions in different           courses,
Medical,   Engineering   and   other   streams
which were completed after the judgment
of the High Court dated 27.06.2019 till
09.09.2020 are saved. Similarly, all the
appointments made to the members of the
Maratha community in public services af-
ter the judgment of the High Court dated
27.06.2019   till   order   passed   by  this
Court on 09.09.2020 are saved.           How-
ever, no further benefit can be claimed
by such Maratha students         admitted in
different course or Maratha students who
were appointed in public services in the
State under Act, 2018.
(f)   After the order was passed on 09.09.2020
neither any admission can be taken in
the educational institutions nor any ap-
pointment can be made in public services
and posts in accordance with Act, 2018.
(2) The  Writ   Petition  (C)No.914    of   2020,  Writ
Petition   (C)No.915   of   2020,   Writ   Petition
(C)No.504 of 2020 filed under Article 32 of
the Constitution are disposed of as per above
directions.
(3) Writ Petition No.938 of 2020 challenging the
Constitutional validity of Constitution 102nd
Amendment Act, 2018 is dismissed in view of
the   interpretation     of  Constitution    102nd
Amendment Act, 2018 as above.
445.   Before we close, we record our indebtedness to
learned   counsel  who   appeared  in  these  cases  and
enlightened us with regard to issues involved in
this batch of appeals and writ petitions which are
of seminal importance both for constitutional law as
well as for the society in general. All the learned
counsel apart from oral submissions have submitted
their excellent brief written notes touching various
issues which were sought to be canvassed by them
before    this    Court,    which   rendered    valuable
assistance to us.
446. Parties shall bear their own costs.
1.       I have carefully gone through the erudite and scholarly
opinions of Justice Ashok Bhushan and Justice S. Ravindra Bhat. So
far as the question Nos.1, 2 and 3 are concerned, they are in unison.
There is a difference of opinion in relation to question Nos. 4, 5
and 6.    I am in agreement with the opinion of Justice Ashok
Bhushan in respect of question Nos.1, 2 and 3. As these issues
have been dealt with exhaustively by Justice Ashok Bhushan, I
do not have anything further to add.
2.    Question Nos.4, 5 and 6 pertain to the interpretation of
Article 342 A of the Constitution of India. On these questions,
I am unable to persuade myself to accept the conclusion
reached by Justice Ashok Bhushan.             I agree with the
denouement of the judgment of Justice S. Ravindra Bhat on
issue Nos.4, 5 and 6.
3.    In view of the cleavage of opinion on the interpretation
of Article 342 A of the Constitution, it is my duty to give
reasons for my views in accord with the judgment of Justice S.
Ravindra Bhat. In proceeding to do so, I am not delving into
those aspects which have been dealt with by him.
4.    Article 342 A which falls for interpretation is as follows: -
342    A.   Socially  and   educationally    backward
classes. — (1) The President may with respect to any
State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after
consultation with the Governor thereof, by public
notification, specify the socially and educationally
backward classes which shall for the purposes of this
Constitution be deemed to be socially and educationally
backward classes in relation to that State or Union
territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from
the Central List of socially and educationally backward
classes specified in a notification issued under clause
(1) any socially and educationally backward class, but
save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said
clause    shall   not    be   varied   by  any   subsequent
notification.
5.    Article 366 (26 C) which is also relevant is as under: -
366. Definitions. Unless the context otherwise
requires,     the    following     expressions   have  the
meanings hereby respectively assigned to them,
[(26C) ―socially and educationally backward classes
means such backward classes as are so deemed under
article 342 A for the purposes of this Constitution;]
6.    Before embarking upon the exercise of construing the
above Articles, it is necessary to refer to the cardinal
principles of interpretation of the Constitution. Constitution is
intended to endure for ages to come, and, consequently to be
adapted to the various crises of human affairs. We must not
forget that it is the Constitution we are expounding 1.          The
Constitution is a living and organic document which requires
to be construed broadly and liberally.               I am reminded of
1 McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. 316 (1819)
the word of caution by Benjamin Cardozo who said that “a
Judge is not a knight errant roaming at will in pursuit of his
own ideal of beauty or of goodness. Judge is not to innovate
at pleasure”.2 Rules which are applied to the interpretation of
other     statutes,      apply       to   the    interpretation       of    the
Constitution3.       It may be desirable to give a broad and
generous construction to the constitutional provisions, but
while doing so the rule of “plain meaning” or “literal”
interpretation, which remains “the primary rule”, has also to
be kept in mind. In fact, the rule of “literal construction” is
the safe rule even while interpreting the Constitution unless
the language used is contradictory, ambiguous, or leads
really to absurd results4. The duty of the judicature is to act
upon the true intention of the legislature, the mens or
sententia       legis.     (See:      G.     Narayanaswami             v.    G.
Pannerselvam5, South Asia Industries Private Ltd v. S.
Sarup      Singh      and      others6,      Institute      of    Chartered
Accountants of India v. Price Waterhouse7 and J.P.
Bansal v. State of Rajasthan8). The first and primary rule
2 Benjamin Cardozo, the Nature of Judicial Process, (New Haven: Yale University Press,
3 Re the Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act,
4 Kuldip Nayar v. Union of India, (2006) 7 SCC 1
of construction is that the intention of the legislature must be
found in the words used by the legislature itself 9.                       Oliver
Wendell Holmes Jr. has famously said in a letter , “I do not care
what their intention was. I only want to know what the words
mean.”10        If the language of the meaning of the statute is
plain, there is no need for construction as legislative intention
is revealed by the apparent meaning11.                    Legislative intent
must be primarily ascertained from the language used in
7.     In his book Purposive Interpretation in Law,13 Aharon
Barak says that constitutional language like the language of
any legal text plays a dual role. On the one hand, it sets the
limits of interpretation. The language of the Constitution is
not clay in the hands of the interpreter, to be molded as he or
she sees fit. A Constitution is neither a metaphor nor a non-
binding recommendation. On the other hand, the language
of the Constitution is a source for its purpose.                    There are
other sources, to be sure, but constitutional language is an
important and highly credible source of information. The fact
9 Kanai Lal Sur v. Paramnidhi Sadhukhan, 1958 (1) SCR 360
10 Cited in Felix Frankfurter, Some Reflections on the Reading of Statutes, Columbia
11 Adams Express Company v. Commonwealth of Kentucky, 238 US 190 (1915)
12 United States v. Goldenberg, 168 US 95 (1897)
13 Aharon Barak, Purposive Interpretation in Law, (Sari Bashi transl.), (Princeton:
that we may learn the purpose of a Constitution from sources
external to it does not mean that we can give a Constitution a
meaning that is inconsistent with its explicit or implicit
language. Interpretation cannot create a new constitutional
text. Talk of Judges amending the Constitution through their
interpretation of the Constitution is just a metaphor.      The
claim that a constitutional text limits but does not command
is true only for the limited number of cases in which, after
exhausting all interpretive tools, we can still extract more
than one legal meaning from the constitutional language and
must therefore leave the final decision to judicial discretion.
In these exceptional cases, language provides a general
direction but does not draw a precise map of how to reach
the destination. Usually, however, constitutional language
sets not only the limits of interpretation, but also its specific
8.     It is a cardinal principle applicable to all kinds of
statutes that you may not for any reason attach to a
statutory provision a meaning which the words of that
provision cannot reasonably bear. If they are capable of more
than one meaning, then you can choose between these
meanings, but beyond that the Court must not go. 15          Lord
Parker, CJ observed in R. v. Oakes16 there is no ground for
reading in words according to what may be ‘the supposed
intention of Parliament’.
9.    Justice Ashok Bhushan in his opinion at para 346 rightly
held that the elementary principle of interpreting the
Constitution or a statute is to look into the words used in the
statute and when the language is clear, the intention of the
legislature is to be gathered from the language used.         He
further opined that aid to interpretation is resorted to only
when there is some ambiguity in words or expression used in
the statute.        Justice Bhushan in State (NCT of Delhi) v.
Union of India17 held that the constitutional interpretation
has to be purposive taking into consideration the need of the
times and constitutional principles. The intent of framers of
the Constitution and object and purpose of constitutional
amendment           always     throw  light on the constitutional
provisions but for interpreting a particular constitutional
provision,     the     constitutional   scheme and the   express
language employed cannot be given a go-by. He further held
that the purpose and intent of the constitutional provisions
have to be found from the very constitutional provisions
which are up for interpretation.
10. In the 183rd Report of the Law Commission of India,
Justice M. Jagannadha Rao observed that a statute is a will of
legislature conveyed in the form of text. It is well settled
principle of law that as a statute is an edict of the legislature,
the conventional way of interpreting or construing the statute
is to see the intent of the legislature.       The intention of
legislature assimilates two aspects. One aspect carries the
concept of ‘meaning’ i.e. what the word means and another
aspect conveys the concept of ‘purpose’ and ‘object’ or
‘reason’ or ‘approach’ pervading through the statute.         The
process of construction, therefore, combines both liberal and
purposive approaches. However, necessity of interpretation
would arise only where a language of the statutory provision
is ambiguous, not clear or where two views are possible or
where the provision gives a different meaning defeating the
object of the statute.    He supported his view by referring to
two judgments of this Court in R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay 18
and Grasim Industries Ltd. v. Collector of Customs,
Bombay19.        It was held in R.S. Nayak (supra) that the
plainest duty of the Court is to give effect to the natural
meaning of the words used in the provision if the words of the
statute are clear and unambiguous.
11. The words of a statute, when there is a doubt about
their meaning, are to be understood in the sense in which
they best harmonise between the subject of the enactment
and the object which the legislature has used. Their meaning
is found not so much in a strictly grammatical or etymological
propriety of language, nor even in its popular use, as in the
subject or in the occasion on which they are used, and the
12. It is a recognised rule of interpretation of statutes that
the expressions used therein should ordinarily be understood
in a sense in which they best harmonise with the object of the
statute, and which effectuate the object of the legislature 21.
However, the object-oriented approach cannot be carried to
the extent of doing violence to the plain language used by re-
writing the section or structure words in place of the actual
words used by the legislature22.              The logical corollary that
flows from the judicial pronouncements and opinion of
20 Workmen of Dimakuchi Tea Estate v Managenment of Dimakuchi Tea Estate, 1958
21 M/s New India Sugar Mills Ltd v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar 1963 SCR Supl.
22 C. I. T v. N. C. Budharaja and Co. 1994 SCC Supl. (1) 280
reputed authors is that the primary rule of construction is
literal construction. If there is no ambiguity in the provision
which is being construed there is no need to look beyond.
Legislative intent which is crucial for understanding the
object and purpose of a provision should be gathered from
the language.      The purpose can be gathered from external
sources but any meaning inconsistent with the explicit or
implicit language cannot be given.
13. In Aron Soloman v. Soloman & Co. 23 the House of
Lords observed that the intention of legislature is a ‘slippery
phrase’.    What the legislature intended can be legitimately
ascertained from that which it has chosen to enact, either in
express words or by reasonable and necessary implication. A
construction which furthers the purpose or object of an
enactment is described as purposive construction.                           A
purposive construction of an enactment is one which gives
effect to the legislative purpose by (a) following the literal
meaning of the enactment where that meaning is in
accordance with the legislative purpose or (b) applying a
strained meaning where the literal meaning is not in
accordance with the legislative purpose. 24               If that is the case,
24 Bennion on Statutory Interpretation, Fifth Edition Pg. 944
there is no gainsaying that purposive interpretation based on
the literal meaning of the enactment must be preferred.
14. In case of ambiguity this Court has adopted purposive
interpretation of statutory provisions by applying rule of
purposive construction. In the instant case, the deliberations
before the Select Committee and its report and Parliamentary
Debates were relied upon by the Respondents in their support
to asseverate that the object of Article 342 A is to the effect
that the power of the State legislature to identify socially and
educationally backward classes is not taken away.          Ergo,
Article 342 A requires to be interpreted accordingly.
15. The exclusionary rule by which the historical facts of
legislation were not taken into account for the purpose of
interpreting a legislation was given a decent burial by the
House of Lords in Pepper (Inspector of Taxes) v Hart25.
In Kalpana Mehta and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. 26,
a five Judge Bench of this Court held that the Parliamentary
Standing Committee report can be taken as an aid of for the
purpose of interpretation of a statutory provision. Wherever
the reliance on such reports is necessary, they can be used
for assisting the court in gathering historical facts. In accord
with the said judgment, the deliberations of the report of the
Select Committee can be utilised as an extrinsic aid for
interpretation of Article 342 A, in case there is any ambiguity
in the provision.
16. In R v. DPP ex-parte Duckenfield27, Laws, CJ,
cautioned about the great dangers in treating government
pronouncements, however, helpful, as an aid to statutory
construction. In Black-Clawson International Ltd.28 taking
the opinion of a minister, or an official or a committee, as to
the intended meaning in particular application of a clause or
a phrase was held to be stunting of the law and not a healthy
development.        The crucial consideration when dealing with
enacting historical materials is the possibility that Parliament
changed its mind, or for some reason departed from it 29.            In
Letang v. Cooper30 it was held that enacting history must
be inspected with great care and caution. As an indication of
legislative intention, it is very far behind the actual words of
the Act.    While setting out the relevant portions of the report
of the Select Committee, Justice Bhat pointed out that the
report reflected the opinions of both sides before concluding
29 Assam Railways and Trading Co Ltd v. Inland Revenue, 1935 AC 445
that the concern of the States will be considered in
accordance with the procedure under Article 341 & Article
342. There is no doubt that the Minister was assuaging the
concerns of the Members by stating that the power of the
States to identify backward classes is not being disturbed. I
am convinced that there is no reason to depart from the text
which is in clear terms and rely upon the legislative history to
construe Article 342 A contrary to the language.                    I am not
persuaded to agree with the submissions of the learned
Attorney General and the other counsel for the States that
Article 342 A has to be interpreted in light of the Select
Committee report and discussion in the Parliament, especially
when the legislative language is clear and unambiguous.
17. Where the Court is unable to find out the purpose of an
enactment, or is doubtful as to its purposes, the Court is
unlikely to depart from the literal meaning 31.                   There is no
dispute that the statement of objects and reasons do not
indicate the purpose for which Article 342 A was inserted.
During the course of the detailed hearing of these matters,
we repeatedly probed from counsel representing both sides
about the purpose for inserting Article 342 A in the
Constitution.     No satisfactory answer was forthcoming.                   In
31 Section 309, Bennion on Statutory Interpretation, 5th Edition.
spite of our best efforts, we could not unearth the reason for
introduction of Article 342 A.      As the purpose is not clear,
literal construction of Article 342 A should be resorted to.
18. Craies       culled  out     the   following  principles    of
1. Legislation   is always     to  be   understood   first  in
accordance with its plain meaning.
2. Where the plain meaning is in doubt, the Courts will
start the process of construction by attempting to
discover, from the provisions enacted, to the broad
purpose of the legislation.
3. Where a particular reading would advance the purpose
identified, and would do no violence to the plain
meaning of the provisions enacted, the Courts will be
prepared to adopt that reading.
4. Where a particular reading would advance the purpose
identified but would strain the plain meaning of the
provisions enacted, the result will depend on the
context and, in particular, on a balance of the clarity of
the purpose identified and the degree of strain on the
language.
5. Where      the     Courts       concluded     that  the  underlined
purpose of the legislation is insufficiently plain, or
cannot be advanced without an unacceptable degree of
violence to the language used, they will be obligated,
however        regretfully       in   the  circumstances     of the
particular case, to leave to the legislature the task of
extending or modifying the legislation32.
19. To ascertain the plain meaning of the legislative
language, we proceed to construe Article 342 A of the
Constitution of India. Article 342 A was inserted in the
Constitution by the Constitution (102nd Amendment) Act,
2017. A plain reading of Article 342 A (1) would disclose that
the President shall specify the socially and educationally
backward classes by a public notification after consultation
with   the    Governor.            Those     specified   as  socially and
educationally backward classes in the notification shall be
deemed to be socially and educationally backward classes in
relation to that State or Union Territory for the purposes of
the Constitution. Article 342 A (2) provides that inclusion or
exclusion from the list of socially and educationally backward
classes specified in the notification under Article 342 A (1)
32 Craies on Legislation, 9th Edition Pg. 643
can be only done by law made by the Parliament.        The word
‘Central list’ used in Article 342 A (1) had given rise to
conflicting interpretations. Article 366 deals with definitions.
Sub-Article 26 (C) was inserted in Article 366 of the
Constitution        by the Constitution (102nd Amendment) Act,
2017 according to which, socially and educationally backward
classes shall mean such backward classes as are so deemed
under Article 342 A for the purposes of the Constitution. The
use of words ‘means’ indicates that the definition is a hard-
and-fast definition, and no other meaning can be assigned to
the expression that is put down in definition. (See: Gough
v. Gough, (1891) 2 QB 665, Punjab Land Development
and Reclamation Corporation Ltd. v. Presiding Officer,
Labour Court (1990) 3 SCC 682 and P. Kasilingam v.
P.S.G. College of Technology, 1995 SCC Supl. (2) 348.)
When a definition clause is defined to “mean” such and such,
the definition is prima facie restrictive and exhaustive.33
20. The legislature can define its own language and
prescribe rules for its construction which will generally be
binding on the Courts34. Article 366 (26) (c) makes it clear
that, it is only those backward classes as are so deemed
33 Indra Sarma v. V. K. V. Sarma, (2013) 15 SCC 755
under Article 342 A which shall be considered as socially and
educationally backward classes for the purposes of the
Constitution and none else.         No other class can claim to
belong to ‘socially and educationally backward classes’ for
the purposes of the Constitution, except those backward
classes as are so deemed under Article 342 A of the
21. This Court in Sudha Rani Garg v. Jagdish Kumar35
dealt with the word ‘deemed’ in the following manner: -
“The word ‘deemed’ is sometimes used to impose for
the purposes of a statute an artificial construction of a
word or phrase that would not otherwise prevail.
Sometimes it is used to put beyond doubt a particular
construction      that   might       otherwise    be   certain.
Sometimes      it   is  used    to    give  a   comprehensive
description that includes what is obvious, what is
uncertain     and     what  is,    in   the   ordinary  sense,
impossible".
22. Lord Asquith in East End Dwellings Co. Ltd v.
Finsbury Borough Council36 held that, “if one is bidden to
treat imaginary state of affairs as real, one must surely,
unless prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real the
consequences and incidents which, if the putative state of
affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from it
or accompanied it.      The use of the word ‘deemed’ in the
definition clause as well as in Article 342 A puts it beyond
doubt that it is only those backward classes which are
specified in the notification that may be issued by the
President, who can claim to be socially and educationally
backward classes for the purposes of the Constitution.
23. There is no equivocacy in the legislative language used
in Article 342 A.    The ordinary meaning that flows from a
simple reading of Article 342 A is that the President after
consultation with the Governor of a State or Union Territory
may issue a public notification specifying socially and
educationally backward classes.       It is those socially and
educationally backward classes who shall be deemed as
socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that
State or Union Territory for the purposes of the Constitution.
There is no obscurity in Article 342 A (1) and it is crystal clear
that there shall be one list of socially and educationally
backward classes which may be issued by the President.
Restricting the operation of a list to be issued under Article
342 A (1) as not being applicable to States can be done only
by reading words which are not there in the provision.
According to Aharon Barak, “the structure of the Constitution
can be given implicit meaning to what is written between the
lines of the text, but it cannot add lines to the text. To do so
would be to fill a gap or lacuna, using interpretative
doctrines”.37 There is no reason for reading Article 342 A (1)
in any other manner except, according to the plain legal
meaning of the legislative language. The words ‘Central list’
is used in Article 342 A (2) have created some controversy in
construing Article 342 A. To find out the exact connotation of
a word in a statute, we must look to the context in which it is
used38.    No words have an absolute meaning, no words can
be defined in vacuo, or without reference to some context 39.
Finally, the famous words of Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
“the word is not a crystal transparent and unchanged; it is a
skin of a living thought and may vary in colour and content
according to the circumstances and the time in which it is
24. Article 342 A (2) provides that inclusion or exclusion
from Central list of socially and educationally backward
classes specified in a notification issued under Sub-Clause 1
37 Barak supra, 374.
38 Nyadar Singh v. Union of India 1988 4 SCC 170
39 Professor HA Smith cited in Union of India v. Sankalchand Himmat Lal Seth [1977) 4
40 Towne v. Eisner, 245 U.S. 425 (1918)
can be done only by the Parliament. A plain reading of the
provision can lead to the following deduction: -
a. There is a notification issued by the President
under clause (1).
b. The      notification     specifies    socially     and
educationally backward classes.
c. Inclusion or exclusion can be done only by law
made by the Parliament.
d. Save otherwise, the notification shall not be varied
by any subsequent notification.
e. The list notified is referred to as “Central list”.
25. I find it difficult to agree with the submissions made on
behalf of the Respondents that the use of words ‘central list’
would restrict the scope and amplitude of the notification to
be issued under Article 342 A (1). There is only one list that
can be issued by the President specifying the socially and
educationally backward classes and only those classes are
treated as socially and educationally backward classes for the
purposes of the Constitution. Taking cue from the National
Commission     for    Backward      Classes    Act,  1993,     the
Respondents argued that the words ‘Central list’ is with
reference only to appointments to Central services and
admission in Central educational institutions.             Reading
‘Central list’ in that manner would be curtailing the width of
Article 342 A (1). If so read, the sweep of Sub-Clause (1) shall
be minimized. Moreover, to achieve the said meaning, words
which are not in Article 342 A (1) have to be read into it.
Contextually, the words Central list in Article 342 A (2) can be
only with reference to the list contained in the notification
which may be issued under Article 342 A (1). It is well settled
law that the provisions of the Constitution have to be
harmoniously construed and it is apparent from Article 342 A
(1) and (2) that there is no scope for any list of socially and
educationally backward classes, other than the list to be
notified by the President.    As the other expressions ‘for the
purposes of the Constitution’ and ‘unless the context
otherwise requires’ have been dealt with by Justice Bhat, I
have nothing more to add to the construction placed by him
on the said expressions. To avoid any confusion, I endorse
the conclusion of Justice Ashok Bhushan on question Nos. 1, 2
and 3 and the final order proposed in Para No. 444 of his
judgment.        Insofar as question Nos. 4, 5 and 6 are
concerned, I am in agreement with the opinion of Justice S.
26. A conspectus of the above discussion would be that
only   those    backward    classes  included    in  the   public
notification under Article 342 A shall be socially and
educationally backward classes for the purposes of the
I have gone through the judgments authored by learned Hon’ble Shri
Ashok Bhushan, J., Hon’ble Shri S. Ravindra Bhat, J. and also the order
authored by Hon’ble Shri L. Nageswara Rao, J. I am in agreement with the
reasoning and the conclusion on the Question Nos. 1, 2 and 3 in the
judgment rendered by Hon’ble Shri Ashok Bhushan, J., as well as additional
reasons recorded by Hon’ble Shri S. Ravindra Bhat, J. and by Hon’ble Shri
I entirely agree with the reasoning and the conclusions in the
Judgment and order authored by Hon’ble Shri S. Ravindra Bhat, J. and
Hon’ble Shri L. Nageswara Rao, J. on Question Nos. 4, 5 and 6.
1.      Franklin D. Roosevelt, the great American leader, once said that “The test of
our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have
much; it is whether we provide enough for those who have too little.”In these batch
of appeals arising from a common judgment of the Bombay High Court 1, this court
is called to adjudicate upon the extent to which reservations are permissible by the
state, the correctness of its approach in designating a community2 as a “Backward
Class” for the purposes of the Constitution, and, by an enactment 3 (hereafter
referred to as “the SEBC Act”) defining who could benefit from, and the extent of
reservations that could be made in various state established facilities and
educational institutions, and in the public services of the State of Maharashtra.
1In WP No 937/2017; 1208/2019; 2126/2019, PIL No. 175/2018 and connected batch of cases.
2The Maratha community (hereafter “the Marathas”).
3Maharashtra State Reservation for Seats for Admission in Educational Institutions in the State and for
appointments in the public services and posts under the State (for Socially and Educationally Backward Classes)
SEBC Act, 2018 i.e., Maharashtra Act No. LXII of 2018 (for short ‘SEBC Act’).
2.      Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, when he spoke on November 25, 1949, in the
Constituent Assembly of India at the time of the adoption of the Constitution,
“From January 26, 1950, onwards we are going to enter into a life of
contradictions. In politics, we will have equality, one man, one vote,
one vote and one value. In society and economy, we will still have
inequality. In our social and economic life, we shall, by reason of our
social and economic structure, continue to deny the principle of one
man-one value.”
3.      The quest for one person, one value, of true equality, and of fraternity of
Indians, where caste, race, gender, and religion are irrelevant, has produced mixed
results. As long as there is no true equality, of opportunity, of access, and of the
true worth of human beings, and as long as the world is “broken up into fragments
by narrow domestic walls”4 the quest remains incomplete. The present judgment is
part of an ongoing debate, which every generation of Indians has to grapple with,
and this court confront, at different points in time.
4.      The Maratha community, in the State of Maharashtra repeatedly sought
reservations through diverse nature of demands through public meetings, marches
etc, by members of the community. It also led to representatives and organizations
of the community taking the demands to the streets, resulting in the State of
Maharashtra promulgating an Ordinance for the first time in the year 2014, which
granted reservation to the community in public employment and in the field of
education. Later, the Ordinance was given the shape of an Act 5, which was
challenged before the Bombay High Court.6 The court, after considering the rival
submissions, including the arguments of the state stayed the operation of the
enactment. The State Government then set up a backward class commission to
5Maharashtra Act No. I of 2015.
ascertain the social and educational status of the community. Initially, the
commission was headed by Justice S. B. Mhase. His demise led to the appointment
of Justice MG Gaikwad (Retired) as chairperson of the commission; it comprised
of 10 other members.The Committee headed by Justice Gaikwad was thus
reconstituted on 3rd November, 2017. By its report dated 13.11.2018 (the Gaikwad
Commission Report)7, the Commission, on the basis of the surveys and studies it
commissioned, and the analysis of the data collected during its proceedings,
recommended that the Maratha class of citizens be declared as a Socially and
Educationally Backward Class (“SEBC” hereafter). This soon led to the enactment
of the SEBC Act, giving effect to the recommendations of the Gaikwad
Commission, resulting in reservation to the extent of 16% in favour of that
community; consequently, the aggregate reservations exceeded 50%.
5.      The SEBC Act was brought into force on 30 th November, 2018. Close on its
heels a spate of writ petitions was filed before the Bombay High Court,
challenging the identification of Marathas as SEBCs, the conclusions of the
Commission, which culminated in its adoption by the State of Maharashtra and
enactment of the SEBC Act, the quantum of reservations, and the provisions of the
Act itself, on diverse grounds. All writ petitions were clubbed together and
considered. By the impugned judgment, the High Court turned down the challenge
and upheld the identification of Marathas as SEBCs, and further upheld the reasons
presented before it, that extraordinary circumstances existed, warranting the breach
of the 50% mark, which was held to be the outer limit in the nine-judge decision of
this court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India8 (hereafter variously “Indra
Sawhney” or “Sawhney”).
6.      The special leave petitions, filed against the impugned judgment, were
heard, and eventually, leave granted. Some writ petitions too were filed,
7Report of the Committee, page 10.
8Indra Sawhney v Union of India 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217.
challenging provisions of the SEBC Act. The validity of the Constitution (102 nd)
Amendment Act9 too is the subject matter of challenge, on the ground that it
violates the basic structure, or essential features of the Constitution.10A Bench of
three judges, after hearing counsel for the parties, referred the issues arising from
these batch of petitions and appeals, to a Constitution bench, for consideration, as
important questions arising for interpretation
7.       The five-judge bench, by its order dated 08.03.2021, referred the following
(1) Whether judgment in case of Indra Sawhney v. Union of India [1992
Suppl. (3) SCC 217] needs to be referred to larger bench or require re-look
by the larger bench in the light of subsequent Constitutional Amendments,
judgments and changed social dynamics of the society etc.?
(2) Whether Maharashtra State Reservation (of seats for admission in
educational institutions in the State and for appointments in the public
services and posts under the State) for Socially and Educationally Backward
Classes (SEBC) Act, 2018 as amended in 2019 granting 12% and 13%
reservation for Maratha community in addition to 50% social reservation is
covered by exceptional circumstances as contemplated by Constitution
(3) Whether the State Government on the strength of Maharashtra State
Backward Commission Report chaired by M.C. Gaikwad has made out a
case of existence of extraordinary situation and exceptional circumstances in
the State to fall within the exception carved out in the judgment of Indra
(4) Whether the Constitution One Hundred and Second Amendment deprives
the State Legislature of its power to enact a legislation determining the
9Hereafter referred to as “the 103rd Amendment”.
10 Writ petition 938/2020.
socially and economically backward classes and conferring the benefits on
the said community under its enabling power?
(5) Whether, States’ power to legislate in relation to “any backward class”
under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is anyway abridged by Article 342(A) read
with Article 366(26c) of the Constitution of India?
(6) Whether Article 342A of the Constitution abrogates States’ power to
legislate or classify in respect of “any backward class of citizens” and
thereby affects the federal policy / structure of the Constitution of India?
8.     I had the benefit of reading the draft judgment of Ashok Bhushan, J. which
has exhaustively dealt with each point. I am in agreement with his draft, and the
conclusions with respect to Point Nos (1) (2) and (3). In addition to the reasons in
the draft judgment of Ashok Bhushan, J., I am also giving my separate reasons, in
respect of Point No. (1). I am however, not in agreement with the reasons and
conclusions recorded in respect of Point Nos. (4) and (5), for reasons to be
discussed elaborately hereafter. I agree with the conclusions of Ashok Bhushan, J.,
in respect of Point No (6); however, I have given my separate reasons on this point
9.     With these prefatory remarks, I would proceed to discuss my reasons,
leading to the conclusions, on both the points of concurrence, as well as
disagreement with the draft judgment of Ashok Bhushan, J.
Re Point No. 1: Whether judgment in case of Indra Sawhney v. Union
of India,1992 Supp. (3) SCC 217 needs to referred to larger bench of
require re-look by the larger bench in the light of subsequent
Constitutional Amendments, judgments and changed social dynamics
10.     A careful reading of the judgments in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India11,
clarifies that seven out of nine judges concurred that there exists a quantitative
limit on reservation – spelt out @ 50%. In the opinion of four judges, therefore, per
the judgment of B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J., this limit could be exceeded under
extraordinary circumstances and in conditions for which separate justification has
to be forthcoming by the State or the concerned agency. However, there is
unanimity in the conclusion by all seven judges that an outer limit for reservation
should be50%. Undoubtedly, the other two judges, Ratnavel Pandian and P.B.
Sawant, JJ. indicated that there is no general rule of 50% limit on reservation. In
these circumstances, given the general common agreement about the existence of
an outer limit, i.e. 50%, the petitioner’s argument about the incoherence or
uncertainty about the existence of the rule or that there were contrary observations
with respect to absence of any ceiling limit in other judgments (the dissenting
judgments of K. Subbarao, in T. Devadasan v Union of India12, the judgments of
S.M. Fazal Ali and Krishna Iyer, JJ. in State of Kerala v N.M. Thomas13 and the
judgment of Chinnappa Reddy, J. in K.C. Vasanth Kumar v. State of Karnataka14)
is not an argument compelling a review or reconsideration of Indra Sawhney rule.
11. The respondents had urged that discordant voices in different subjects
(Devadasan, N.M. Thomas and Indra Sawhney) should lead to re-examination of
the ratio in Indra Sawhney. It would be useful to notice that unanimity in a given
bench (termed as a “supermajority”) – denoting a 5-0 unanimous decision in a
Constitution Bench cannot be construed as per se a strong or compelling reason to
doubt the legitimacy of a larger bench ruling that might contain a narrow majority
(say, for instance with a 4-3 vote, resulting in overruling of a previous unanimous
precedent). The principle of stare decisis operates both vertically- in the sense that
decisions of appellate courts in the superior in vertical hierarchy, bind tribunals and
courts lower in the hierarchy, and horizontally- in the sense that a larger bench
formation ruling, would be binding and prevail upon the ruling of a smaller bench
formation. The logic in this stems from the raison d’etre for the doctrine of
precedents, i.e. stability in the law. If this rule were to be departed from and the
legitimacy of a subsequent larger bench ruling were to be doubted on the ground
that it comprises of either plurality of opinions or a narrow majority as compared
with a previous bench ruling (which might be either unanimous or of a larger
majority, but of lower bench strength), there would uncertainty and lack of clarity
in the realm of precedential certainty. If precedential legitimacy of a larger bench
ruling were thus to be doubted, there are no rules to guide the courts’ hierarchy or
even later benches of the same court about which is the appropriate reading to be
adopted (such as for instance, the number of previous judgments to be considered
for determining the majority, and consequently the correct law).
12. In view of the above reasoning, it is held that the existence of a plurality of
opinions or discordant or dissident judgments in the past – which might even have
led to a majority (on an overall headcount) supporting a particular rule in a
particular case cannot detract from the legitimacy of a rule enunciated by a later,
larger bench, such as the nine-judge ruling in Indra Sawhney.
13. So far as the argument that Indra Sawhney was concerned only with
reservations under Article 16(4) is concerned, this Court is inclined to accept the
submissions of the petitioner. The painstaking reasoning in various judgments, in
Indra Sawhney, including the judgments of Pandian and Sawant, JJ. would show
that almost all the previous precedents on both Article 15(4) and 16(4) were
considered15.
14. The tenor of all the judgments shows the anxiety of this Court to decisively
rule on the subject of reservations under the Constitution – in regard to backward
classes and socially and educationally backward classes. This is also evident from
15M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore 1963 Supp. 1 SCR 439; P. Rajendran v. State of T.N. (1968) 2 SCR 786 [Articles
15(4)]; A Peeriakaruppan v. State of T.N. (1971) 1 SCC 38 [Article 15(4)]; State of A.P. v. USV Balram (1972) 1
SCC 660 [Article 15(4)]; T. Devadasan (supra); State of U.P. v. Pradeep Tandon (1975) 1 SCC 267; Janki Prasad
Parimoo v. State of J&K (1973) 1 SCC 420; N.M. Thomas [Article 16(4) & K.C. Vasanth Kumar [Article 15(4)].
the history of Article 15(4) which was noticed and the phraseology adopted
(socially and educationally backward classes) which was held to be wider than
“backward classes” though the later expression pointed to social backwardness.
Such conclusions cannot be brushed aside by sweeping submission pointing to the
context of the adjudication in Indra Sawhney.
15. The argument on behalf of the States –that a decision is to be considered as a
ratio only as regards the principles decided, having regard to the material facts, in
the opinion of this Court, the reliance upon a judgment of this Court in Krishena
Kumar and Anr. v. Union of India & Ors. 16 in the opinion of this Court is
insubstantial. The reference of the dispute, i.e. notification of various backward
classes for the purpose of Union public employment under Article 16(4) and the
issuance of the OM dated 1990 no doubt provided the context for the Court to
decide as it did in Indra Sawhney. However, to characterize its conclusions and the
considerations through the judgments of various judges, as not ratios but mere
obiter or observations not binding upon the states is an over-simplification. The
OM did lead to widespread protests and discontent. Initially, the writ petitions were
referred to a five-judge bench which, upon deliberation and hearing felt that the
matter required consideration by a larger bench (presumably in view of the
previous ruling by the seven judges in N.M. Thomas where two judges had
expressly stated that there was no ceiling on reservation and the later five judge
judgment in K.C. Vasanth Kumar where one judge had expressed a similar
reservation). It was for the purpose of decisively declaring the law that the nine-
judge bench was formed and the question formulated by it. Not only did the judges
who constituted a majority speak about this rule; even the two other judges who
did not agree with the 50% ceiling rule, dealt with this aspect. This is evident from
“518. To summarise, the question may be answered thus. There is no
legal infirmity in keeping the reservations under Clause (4) alone or
under Clause (4) and Clause (1) of Article 16 together, exceeding
50%. However, validity of the extent of excess of reservations over
50% would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case
including the field in which and the grade or level of administration
for which the reservation is kept. Although, further, legally and
theoretically the excess of reservations over 50% may be justified, it
would ordinarily be wise and nothing much would be lost, if the
intentions of the framers of the Constitution and the observations of
Dr. Ambedkar, on the subject in particular, are kept in mind. The
reservations should further be kept category and gradewise at
appropriate percentages and for practical purposes the extent of
reservations should be calculated category and gradewise..”
16.     Likewise, Pandian, J., after elaborate discussion,18recorded his conclusions
“189. I fully share the above views of Fazal Ali, Krishna Iyer,
Chinnappa Reddy, JJ holding that no maximum percentage of
reservation             can           be          justifiably            fixed         under
Articles 15(4) and/or 16(4) of the Constitution.”
17. Both show that the extent of whether a 50% limit is applicable, was
considered by all the judges. Therefore, the arguments on behalf of the States and
the contesting respondents in this regard are unmerited. Likewise, to say that
whether a 50% limit of reservation existed or not was not an issue or a point of
reference, is without basis; clearly that issue did engage the anxious consideration
of the court.
17 At page 552, SCC Report.
18In paras 177-178 at page 407-413 and the conclusions in para 189 at page 413 in Indra Sawhney (supra).
18.     The States had argued that providing a ceiling (of 50%) amounts to
restricting the scope of Part III and Part IV of the Constitution. A provision of the
constitution cannot be “read down” as to curtail its width, or shackle state power,
which is dynamic. The state legislatures and executives are a product of
contemporary democratic processes. They not only are alive to the needs of the
society, but are rightfully entitled to frame policies for the people. Given the
absence of any caste census, but admitted growth of population, there can be no
doubt that the proportion of the backward classes has swelled, calling for greater
protection under Articles 15 (4) and 16 (4). Also, every generation has aspirations,
which democratically elected governments are bound to meet and consider, while
framing policies. In view of these factors, the fixed limit of 50% on reservations,
requires to be reconsidered. Counsel submitted that whether reservations in a given
case are unreasonable and excessive, can always be considered in judicial review,
having regard to the circumstances of the particular case, the needs of the state and
by weighing the rights, in the context of the states’ priorities, having regard to their
obligations under the Directive Principles of State Policy, which are now deemed
as fundamental as the rights under Part III of the Constitution. The court’s
flexibility in testing whether a measure is reasonable or not can always be retained
and moulded appropriately.
19. Lt. Col Khajoor Singh v. Union of India (supra) is an authority for the
approach that this court should adopt, when it is asked to reconsider a previous
precedent of long standing. The court observed that:
“We are of opinion that unless there are clear and compelling
reasons, which cannot be denied, we should not depart from the
interpretation given in these two cases and indeed from any
interpretation given in an earlier judgment of this Court, unless there
is a fair amount of unanimity that the earlier decisions are manifestly
wrong. This Court should not, except when it is demonstrated beyond
all reasonable doubt that its previous ruling, given after due
deliberation and full hearing, was erroneous, go back upon its
previous ruling, particularly on a constitutional issue.”
20.    In Keshav Mills (supra) the court elaborated what considerations would
weigh with it, when a demand for review of the law declared in a previous
“..Frequent exercise by this Court of its power to review its earlier
decisions on the ground that the view pressed before it later appears
to the Court to be more reasonable, may incidentally tend to make law
uncertain and introduce confusion which must be consistently
avoided. …it would be inexpedient to lay down any principles which
should govern the approach of the Court in dealing with the question
of reviewing and revising its earlier decisions. It would always depend
upon several relevant considerations: What is the nature of the
infirmity or error on which a plea for a review and revision of the
earlier view is based? On the earlier occasion, did some patent
aspects of the question remain unnoticed, or was the attention of the
Court not drawn to any relevant and material statutory provision, or
was any previous decision of this Court bearing on the point not
noticed? Is the Court hearing such plea fairly unanimous that there is
such an error in the earlier view? What would be the impact of the
error on the general administration of law or on public good? Has the
earlier decision been followed on subsequent occasions either by this
Court or by the High Courts? And, would the reversal of the earlier
decision lead to public inconvenience, hardship or mischief? These
and other relevant considerations must be carefully borne in mind
whenever this Court is called upon to exercise its jurisdiction to
review and revise its earlier decisions.”
21.    Identical observations were made in Jindal Stainless (supra). In Union of
India v Raghubir Singh19, a Constitution Bench articulated the challenges often
“….The social forces which demand attention in the cauldron of
change from which a new society is emerging appear to call for new
perceptions and new perspectives…..The acceptance of this principle
ensured the preservation and legitimation provided to the doctrine of
binding precedent, and therefore, certainty and finality in the law,
while permitting necessary scope for judicial creativity and
adaptability of the law to the changing demands of society. The
question then is not whether the Supreme Court is bound by its own
previous decisions. It is not. The question is under what circumstances
and within what limits and in what manner should the highest Court
over-turn its own pronouncements.”
22.       What the respondents seek, in asking this court to refer the issue to a larger
bench, strikes at the very essence of equality. The review of precedents undertaken
by Indra Sawhney not only spanned four turbulent decades, which saw several
amendments to the Constitution, but led to a debate initiated by five judges in M.R.
Balaji, (and followed up in at least more than 10 decisions) later continued by
seven judges in N.M. Thomas. This debate- i.e., between Balaji and Indra
Sawhney, saw the court’s initial declaration that a 50% ceiling on reservations
should be imposed, which was questioned in three judgments, though not in
majority decisions of various benches. Therefore, to decisively settle this important
issue- among other issues, the nine-judge bench was constituted. Indra Sawhney
decisively ruled that reservations through special provisions should not exceed
50% by a 7-2 majority. Two judges did not indicate any limit on reservations, they
did not also indicate any clear guiding principle about what should be the court’s
approach, when a party complains that reservations are excessive or unreasonable.
Indra Sawhney is equally decisive on whether reservations can be introduced for
any new class, or the quantum of reservations, when introduced, or changed, can
be the subject matter of judicial review, for which according to the majority of
judges, the guiding principle would be the one enunciated in Barium Chemicals v.
201966 (Suppl.) 3 S.C.R. 311, to the effect that where a statutory power can be exercised through the subjective
satisfaction of any authority or the state, it should be based on objective materials, and on relevant considerations,
eschewing extraneous factors and considerations.
23.       The salience of the issue under consideration is that equality has many
dimensions. In the context of Articles 15 (4) and 16 (4,) and indeed the power of
classification vested in the state, to adopt protective discrimination policies, there
is an element of obligation, or a duty, to equalize those sections of the population
who were hitherto, “invisible” or did not matter. The reach of the equalizing
principle, in that sense is compelling. Thus while, as explained by this court in
Mukesh Kumar v. State of Uttarakhand21 there is no right to claim a direction that
reservations should be provided (the direction in that case being sought was
reservation in promotions in the state of Uttarakhand), the court would intervene if
the state acts without due justification, but not to the extent of directing
reservations.22Equally, the states’ obligation to ensure that measures to uplift the
educational and employment opportunities of all sections, especially vulnerable
sections such as scheduled castes and STs and backward class of citizens, is
underscored- not only in Article 15 (4) but also by Article 46, though it is a
directive principle.23 It is wrong therefore, to suggest that Indra Sawhney did not
examine the states’ obligations in the light of Directive Principles; it clearly did- as
is evident from the express discussion on that aspect in several judgments.24
22As this court did, in P & T Scheduled Caste/Tribe Employee Welfare Association vs Union of India &Ors. 1988
SCR Suppl. (2) 623, when, upon withdrawal of a government order resulted in denial of reservation in promotion,
hitherto enjoyed by the employees. The court held:
“While it may be true that no writ can be issued ordinarily competing the Government to make
reservation under Article 16 (4) which PG NO 630 is only an enabling clause, the circumstances in which
the members belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Posts and Telegraphs
Department are deprived of indirectly the advantage of such reservation which they were enjoying earlier
while others who are similarly situated in the other departments are allowed to enjoy it make the action of
Government discriminatory and invite intervention by this Court.”
23“46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other
weaker sections The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them
from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.”
24There is discussion about the states’ obligations, in the context of reservations, in the judgments of Pandian
479-451); R.M. Sahai, J (Para 593) and B.P. Jeevan Reddy, for himself, Kania, CJ, M.N. Venkatachalaiah and A.M.
24.      Protective discrimination, affirmative action, or any other term used by this
court, means the measure of the state to ensure that past inequities are not carried
on as today’s burdens, that full (and one may add, meaningful) opportunities are
given to all in participation in governance structures: access to public institutions
(through special provisions under Article 15 (4)) and adequate representation
(through reservations under Article 16 (4)). They are tools in the repertoire of the
states to empower those hitherto barred from sharing power- and all that went with
it, of bringing first hand perspectives in policy making, of acting as pathbreakers,
of those breaking the glass ceiling- in short, imparting dimensions in democratic
25. A constant and recurring theme in the several judgments of Indra Sawhney
was the concept of balance. This expression was used in two senses- one, to
correct the existing imbalance which existed, due to past discriminatory practices
that kept large sections of the society backward; two, the quest for achieving the
balance between the guarantee of equality to all, and the positive or affirmative
discrimination sanctioned by Article 15 (4) and 16 (4). 26 B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J (for
himself and four other judges) held that (para 808, SCC reports):
“It needs no emphasis to say that the principal aim of Articles 14 and
16 is equality and equality of opportunity and that clause (4) of
Ahmadi, JJ (in Paras 648-49, 695, 747, Paras 834-835 and Para 860- all SCC references).
25The idea of empowerment is articulated in the judgment of Jeevan Reddy, in Indra Sawhney firstly in Para 694:
“The above material makes it amply clear that the objective behind clause (4) of Article 16 was the sharing of State
power. The State power which was almost exclusively monopolised by the upper castes i.e., a few communities, was
now sought to be made broad-based. The backward communities who were till then kept out of apparatus of power,
were sought to be inducted thereinto and since that was not practicable in the normal course, a special provision
was made to effectuate the said objective. In short, the objective behind Article 16(4) is empowerment of the
deprived backward communities — to give them a share in the administrative apparatus and in the governance of
the community.” and then, in Para 788. that “the object of Article 16(4) was “empowerment” of the backward
classes. The idea was to enable them to share the state power.”
26This theme of balance occurs 49 times in various judgments. All the judges deal with it; although
Pandian and Sawant, JJ, reject the numerical ceiling of 50%, their judgments acknowledge the need to
maintain the balance between the main parts of Articles 15 and 16, while ensuring that past discrimination
is remedied.
Article 16 is but a means of achieving the very same objective. Clause
(4) is a special provision — though not an exception to clause (1).
Both the provisions have to be harmonised keeping in mind the fact
that both are but the re-statements of the principle of equality
enshrined in Article 14. The provision under Article 16(4) —
conceived in the interest of certain sections of society — should be
balanced against the guarantee of equality enshrined in clause (1) of
Article 16 which is a guarantee held out to every citizen and to the
entire society.”
26.    There is more discussion on this subject by the same judgment. 27Dr.
Thommen, J, expressed that reservations should not be an end all, and should not
be perpetuated, beyond the objectives they were designed to achieve and that “A
balance has to be maintained between the competing values and the rival claims
and interests so as to achieve equality and freedom for all.” (Ref. Para 255, SCC
reports).R.M. Sahai, J, expressed the idea in these terms (Ref. Para 560, SCC
“Any State action whether ‘affirmative’ or ‘benign’, ‘protective’ or
‘competing’ is constitutionally restricted first by operation of Article
16(4) and then by interplay of Articles 16(4) and 16(1). State has been
empowered to invade the constitutional guarantee of ‘all’ citizens
under Article 16(1) in favour of ‘any’ backward class of citizens only
if in the opinion of the government it is inadequately represented.
Objective being to remove disparity and enable the unfortunate ones
in the society to share the services to secure equality in, ‘opportunity
and status’ any State action must be founded on firm evidence of clear
and legitimate identification of such backward class and their
inadequate representation. Absence of either renders the action
suspect. Both must exist in fact to enable State to assume jurisdiction
to enable it to take remedial measures….States' latitude is further
narrowed when on existence of the two primary, basic or
jurisdictional facts it proceeds to make reservation as the wisdom and
legality of it has to be weighed in the balance of equality pledged and
guaranteed to every citizen and tested on the anvil of reasonableness
to “smoke out” any illegitimate use and restrict the State from
crossing the clear constitutional limits.”
27Paras 614 and 814, SCC reports.
27.     Constitutional adjudication involves making choices, which necessarily
means that lines have to be drawn, and at times re-drawn- depending on “the
cauldron of change”28. It has been remarked that decisions dealing with
fundamental concepts such as the equality clause are “heavily value-laden, and
necessarily so, since value premises (other than the values of "equality" and
"rationality") are necessary to the determination that the clause requires.”29
28. Interpretation of the Constitution, is in the light of its uniqueness, Dr.
Aharon Barak, the distinguished former President of the Israeli Supreme Court
“Some argue that giving a modern meaning to the language of the
constitution is inconsistent with regarding the constitution as a source
of protection of the individual from society31. Under this approach, if
the constitution is interpreted in accordance with modern views, it will
reflect the view of the majority to the detriment of the minority. My
reply to this claim is inter alia, that a modern conception of human
rights is not simply the current majority’s conception of human rights.
The objective purpose refers to fundamental values that reflect the
deeply held beliefs of modern society, not passing trends. These beliefs
are not the results of public opinion polls or mere populism; they are
fundamental beliefs that have passed the test of time, changing their
form but not their substance.”
29.     As the organ entrusted with the task of interpreting the laws and the
Constitution, the word of this court is final. Undoubtedly its role is as a co-equal
branch of governance; nevertheless, its duty to interpret the law and say what its
silences (or ambiguities) denote, in the particular contexts that it has to contend
28A phrase used in Raghubir Singh (supra).
29Legislative Purpose, Rationality, and Equal Protection, 82 YALE L.J. 123 (1972). Cf. C. PERELMAN,
30Aharon Barak, The Judge in a Democracy, p.132.
31 See generally Antonin Scalia, “Originalism: The Lesser Evil, “57 U. Cin. L. Rev. 849, 862-863
with, involve making choices. These choices are not made randomly, or
arbitrarily32, but based on a careful analysis of the rights involved, the remedies
proposed by the legislative or executive measure, the extent of limits imposed by
the Constitution, and so on. The history of the legislation or the measure, or indeed
the provision of the Constitution plays a role in this process. Interpretation involves
an element of line drawing, of making choices. This court’s decisions are replete
with such instances. The doctrine of classification is the first instance where this
court drew a line, and indicated a choice of interpretation of Article 14; likewise,
right from In re Kerala Education Bill33to T.M.A Pai Foundation v. State of
Karnataka,34 a textually absolute fundamental right, i.e. Article 30 has been
interpreted not to prevent regulation for maintenance of educational standards, and
legislation to prevent mal-administration. Yet, whenever a choice is made in the
interpretation of a provision of this constitution, and a limit indicated by a decision,
it is on the basis of principle and principle alone.
30. As noticed previously, the search of this court, in Indra Sawhney – after an
exhaustive review of all previous precedents, was to indicate an enduring principle
for application by courts, that would strike the just balance between the
aspirational rights – and the corresponding duty of the states to introduce
affirmative measures to combat inequality (under Articles 15 [4] and 16 [4]) on the
one hand, and the principle of equality and its command against practising
inequality in proscribed areas (caste being one, in both Articles 15 and 16). It was
suggested during the hearing that the quantitative criteria (50% limit on
32Michael Kirby, Indian and Australian Constitutional Law: A Recent Study in Contrasts’, 60 JILI
(2018) 1, p. 30; Also see Herbert Weschler, ‘Towards Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law’, (1959)
reservation) is too restrictive leaving no breathing room for democratically elected
governments. This court remarked in R.C. Poudyal v. Union of India35 that
“124. … In the interpretation of a constitutional document, “words
are but the framework of concepts and concepts may change more
than words themselves”. The significance of the change of the
concepts themselves is vital and the constitutional issues are not
solved by a mere appeal to the meaning of the words without an
acceptance of the line of their growth. It is aptly said that “the
intention of a Constitution is rather to outline principles than to
engrave details”.”
31.     The idea of a definitive and objective principle, in the form of a 50% ceiling
on limitation, emerges on an overall reading of Indra Sawhney. The argument
made by the respondents was that this court should not go by such a ceiling limit,
but rather, while exercising its judicial review power, proceed on a case-by-case
approach, and resting its conclusions on fact dependent exercises, using other
criteria, such as reasonableness, proportionality, etc. for judging excessive
reservations. However, what constitutes reasonableness and what is proportionate
in a given case, would be unchartered and indeterminate areas. It is one thing to try
persuading the court to discard a known principle, in the light of its loss of
relevance, yet for that argument to prevail, not only should the harm caused by the
existing principle be proved, but also a principle that is sought to be substituted,
should have clarity, or else, the argument would be one asking the court to take a
leap in the dark. It is not enough, therefore to resort to observations such as “the
length of the leap to be provided depends upon the gap to be covered” 36 or the
proportionality doctrine (deployed to judge validity of an executive or legislative
measure), because they reveal no discernible principle. Reasonableness is no
36State of Punjab v. Hiralal, 1971 (3) SCR 267.
doubt a familiar phrase in the constitutional lexicon; yet there is considerable
subjectivity and relativity in its practise. Again, to quote Dr. Barak there are “zones
of reasonableness”37. This places the court in a difficult situation, where the state’s
choices require greater deference, and a corresponding narrowing of judicial
review, given that the standard of review is the one indicated in Barium Chemicals.
The South African Constitutional Court voiced a similar idea, in connection with
an affirmative action program, when it observed that:
“The fairness of a measure differentiating on any prohibited ground
depends not only on its purpose, but on the cumulative effect of all
relevant factors, including the extent of its detrimental effects on non-
32.    In another case, City Council of Pretoria v. Walker, 39Sachs J.(of the South
African Constitutional Court)remarked that:
"[p]rocesses of differential treatment which have the legitimate
purpose of bringing about real equality should not be undertaken in a
manner which gratuitously and insensitively offends and marginalises
persons identified as belonging to groups who previously enjoyed
33.    In that case, the question for judicial review was whether a local authority in
a period of transition, could impose a lower flat rate tariff in one locality (inhabited
by the historically discriminated black community, with poor infrastructure) and a
higher metered tariff in a locality with better infrastructure, inhabited by the white
community. Sachs J. held that this was not unfair discrimination against the
applicant, a white resident, but rather a failure on the part of the local authority to
put down a basis for the differential levy of tariffs, rooted in substantive equality:
37The Judge in a Democracy, Aharon Barak at p. 248.
38Harksen v. Lane 1997 (11) BCLR 1489 (CC) at 1511C.
39 1998 (3) BCLR 257 (CC) at para. 123.
“Yet, any form of systematic deviation from the principle of equal and
impartial application of the law (as was the practice in the present
case for a certain period), might well have to be expressed in a law of
general application which would be justiciable according to the
criteria of reasonableness and justifiability”.
34.      Upon examination of the issue from this perspective, the ceiling of 50% with
the “extraordinary circumstances” exception, is the just balance- what is termed as
the “Goldilocks solution”40- i.e. the solution containing the right balance that
allows the state sufficient latitude to ensure meaningful affirmative action, to those
who deserve it, and at the same time ensures that the essential content of equality,
and its injunction not to discriminate on the various proscribed grounds (caste,
religion, sex, place of residence) is retained. This court in M. Nagaraj v. Union of
India41observed that “a numerical benchmark is the surest immunity against
charges of discrimination.” To dilute the 50% benchmark further, would be to
effectively destroy the guarantee of equality, especially the right not to be
discriminated against on the grounds of caste (under Articles 15 and 16).
35. In view of all these reasons, the argument that Indra Sawhney requires
reconsideration, and ought to be referred to a larger bench, is hereby rejected.
Affirmative Action and the Reservation Paradigm
36.      Before parting with this section, this opinion would dwell upon affirmative
action, and possibilities under the Constitution, from a larger perspective. Most
debates, and precedents in the country have centred round the extent of reservation
40“Having or producing the optimal balance between two extremes” The Merriman Webster Dictionary
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/Goldilocks. The term was used by Justice Elena Kagan in
her dissent, in Arizona Free Enterprise Club's Freedom Club PAC v. Bennett, 564 U.S. 721 (2011) “the
difficulty then, is finding the Goldilocks solution-not too large, not too small, but just right.” This term is
also used to denote a proper balance, in management parlance.
and administration of quotas (reservations) under Articles 15 (4) and 16(4). The
term “special provision” in Article 15 (4) is of wider import, than reservations.
Unlike the United States of America which – in the absence of a provision enabling
such special provisions, and which has witnessed a turbulent affirmative action
policy jurisprudence, the 1960s and 1970s witnessing the framing of policies and
legislation, and the subsequent narrowing of minority and racial criteria, to support
affirmative action, our Constitution has a specific provision.
37. During the hearing, it was pointed out that there are not enough
opportunities for education of backward classes of citizens, and that schools and
educational institutions are lacking. It was argued by the states that sufficient
number of backward classes of young adults are unable to secure admissions in
institutions of higher learning.
38. It would be, in this context, relevant to notice that two important
amendments to the Constitution of India, which have the effect of transforming the
notion of equality, were made in the last 15 years. The first was the eighty sixth
amendment – which inserted Article 21A42- which had the effect of enjoining the
state to provide free and compulsory education to all children in the age group 6-
14. The second was the Constitution Ninety Third Amendment Act, which inserted
Article 15 (5)43 enabling the state to make special provisions “for the advancement
of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their
admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions,
whether aided or unaided.” The transformative potential of these provisions (both
42“21A. Right to education. — The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of
six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.”
43“15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth ..[(5) Nothing in this
article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from making any special provision, by
law, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority
educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.”
of which have been upheld by this court – in Pramati Educational & Cultural
Trust v. Union of India44) is yet to be fully realized. Article 21A guarantees
minimum universal education; whereas Article 15(5) enables access to backward
classes of citizens admissions, through special provisions by the state, in private
educational institutions. The Right to Education Act, 2009 provides a broad
statutory framework for realization of Article 21A.
39. The availability of these constitutional provisions, however does not mean
that those belonging to backward class of citizens would be better off or would
reap any automatic benefits. Here, it is relevant to consider that often, any debate
as to the efficacy or extent of reservation, invariably turns to one stereotypical
argument- of merit. Long ago, in his important work 45– Marc Galanter had dealt
with the issue of merit in this manner:
“Let us take merit to mean performance on tests (examinations,
interview, character references or whatever) thought to be related to
performance relevant to the position (or other opportunity) in
question and commonly used as a measure of qualification for that
position. (In every case it is an empirical question whether the test
performance is actually a good predictor of performance in the
position, much less of subsequent positions for which it is a
preparation.) Performance on these tests is presumably a composite
of native ability, situational advantages (stimulation in the family
setting, good schools, sufficient wealth to avoid malnutrition or
exhausting work, etc.), and individual effort. The latter may be
regarded as evidence of moral desert, but neither native ability nor
situational advantages would seem to be. The common forms of
selection by merit do not purport to measure the moral desert
dimension of performance. Unless one is willing to assume that such
virtue is directly proportionate to the total performance, the argument
for merit selection cannot rest on the moral deservingness of
individual candidates…..”
45 Marc Galanter, Competing Equalities – Law and the Backward Classes in India.
40.   In his judgment, (in Indra Sawhney) Sawant,J. too spoke of this
“405. The inequalities in Indian society are born in homes and
sustained through every medium of social advancement. Inhuman
habitations, limited and crippling social intercourse, low-grade
educational institutions and degrading occupations perpetuate the
inequities in myriad ways. Those who are fortunate to make their
escape from these all-pervasive dragnets by managing to attain at
least the minimum of attainments in spite of the paralysing effects of
the debilitating social environment, have to compete with others to
cross the threshold of their backwardness. Are not those attainments,
however low by the traditional standards of measuring them, in the
circumstances in which they are gained, more creditable? Do they not
show sufficient grit and determination, intelligence, diligence,
potentiality and inclination towards learning and scholarship? Is it
fair to compare these attainments with those of one who had all the
advantages of decent accommodation with all the comforts and
facilities, enlightened and affluent family and social life, and high
quality education? Can the advantages gained on account of the
superior social circumstances be put in the scales to claim merit and
flaunted as fundamental rights? May be in many cases, those coming
from the high classes have not utilised their advantages fully and their
score, though compared with others, is high, is in fact not so when
evaluated against the backdrop of their superior advantages - may
even be lower…..
406. Those who advance merit contention, unfortunately, also
ignore the very basic fact - (though in other contexts, they may be the
first to accept it) - that the traditional method of evaluating merit is
neither scientific nor realistic. Marks in one-time oral or written test
do not necessarily prove the worth or suitability of an individual to a
particular post, much less do they indicate his comparative calibre.
What is more, for different posts, different tests have to be applied to
judge the suitability. The basic problems of this country are mass-
oriented. India lives in villages, and in slums in towns and cities. To
tackle their problems and to implement measures to better their lot,
the country needs personnel who have firsthand knowledge of their
problems and have personal interest in solving them. What is needed
is empathy and not mere sympathy. One of the major reasons why
during all these years after Independence, the lot of the downtrodden
has not even been marginally improved and why majority of the
schemes for their welfare have remained on paper, is perceptibly
traceable to the fact that the implementing machinery dominated as it
is by the high classes, is indifferent to their problems….”
There were observations earlier in the judgment of Chinnappa Reddy, J, in
Anatole France had – in his ironic (and iconic) observations remarked once,
“In its majestic equality, the law forbids rich and poor alike to sleep
under bridges, beg in the streets and steal loaves of bread.”
41.     The previous rulings in Vasant Kumar (supra), and the comments of Dr.
Amartya Sen in his work “Merit and Justice” were considered in some detail, in
the recent ruling in B.K. Pavitra v. Union of India46,
““Merit” must not be limited to narrow and inflexible criteria such as
one's rank in a standardised exam, but rather must flow from the
actions a society seeks to reward, including the promotion of equality
in society and diversity in public administration.”
This court also noted that merit as we understand - i.e. performance in standardised
tests, is largely dependent upon neutral factors, which discriminate in favour of
those who are privileged.
42. The argument of merit thus ignores the inherent and situational inequity
between those who have no access to the means of achieving the goal of
meaningful education, i.e. to colleges and professional institutions, based on
competitive evaluations like tests, and those who have all the wherewithal for it.
Those from low-income groups cannot join coaching programmes, which hone
candidates’ skills in succeeding in an entrance test.
43. Overemphasis on merit therefore, ignores the burdens of the past, assumes
that everything is perfectly fair now and asks the question of how the candidate
fares in examinations that test only a narrow range of skills, mainly of linear-type
thought. This decontextualized, neutrality-based thinking glosses over historical
and centuries old inequalities, the burdens of which continue to plague those who
labour under disadvantage, and through the so called “level playing field” of a
common exam, or evaluation, privileges those who had, and continue to have,
access to wealth, power, premium education and other privileges, thus
consolidating these advantages. Merit is a resource attractor. Those with it,
accumulate more of it, more wealth and acquire more power. They use that money
and power to purchase more increments of merit for themselves and their children.
44. The eminent legal thinker, Michael Sandel, in his Tyranny of Merit, bemoans
that the US has now become a sorting machine“that promises mobility on the basis
of merit but entrenches privilege and promotes attitudes toward success corrosive
of the commonality democracy requires” (p. 155)He further says that first, all are
told that although the promise of a mobile society based on merit is better than a
hereditary hierarchy, it is important to comprehend that this promise does not come
with any attendant promise to attenuate inequality in society. On the contrary, this
promise legitimizes “inequalities that arise from merit rather than birth” (p.
161).Second, we learn that a system that rewards the most talented is likely to
undervalue the rest, either explicitly or implicitly.
45. The context of these observations is to highlight that even when reservations
are provided in education, sufficient numbers of the targeted students may not be
able to achieve the goal of admission, because of the nature of the entrance criteria.
Equality of opportunity then, to be real and meaningful, should imply that the
necessary elements to create those conditions, should also be provided for. It would
therefore be useful to examine – only by way of illustration- the schemes that exist,
for advancing educational opportunities, to Scheduled Caste (“SC” hereafter)/
Scheduled Tribe (“ST” hereafter) and SEBC students.
46.       Central government scholarships are available to students from SC communities,
for studies in Class IX and X, conditional to income of parents/ guardians being less than
₹2,50,000 per annum. Eligible students must also not be covered by any other central
government scholarships or funding, but may be eligible for the National Means-cum-
Merit Scholarship Scheme.47 Under the pre matric scholarship scheme, day scholars are
provided with ₹225 per month for a period of ten months, with a books and ad hoc grant,
at ₹750 p.a. Hostellers receive ₹525 per month, for a period of ten months, with a similar
grant at ₹1000 p.a. For 2020-21 a total amount of ₹ 750 crores was allocated, of which ₹
404.93 crores was released. The previous years, from 2015-16 to 2019-20, the total
allocated budget was ₹ 1,922 crores, of which ₹ 1,561.90 crores was released to 121.85
47.       Pre-matric scholarships are provided for students of Class I to X, whose
parents are manual scavengers, tanners and flyers, waste-pickers, or persons
engaged in hazardous cleaning, as defined under the Manual Scavengers Act,
2013.49 Hostellers are provided ₹700 per month, while day scholars, ₹225 per
month through the academic year (ten months). Grants of ₹750 and ₹1000 p.a. are
available to day-scholars and hostellers respectively. Here too, selected candidates
are excluded from all other scholarships.
47       Scheme        List,     Ministry      of    Social    Justice    and    Empowerment,        available   at
http://socialjustice.nic.in/SchemeList/Send/23?mid=24541 (Last accessed on 21.04.2021). See also, Notification
dated 06.09.2019, ‘Funding pattern for Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for SC Students studying in Class 9 th and
10th               for                the            year              2019-20’,            available            at
http://socialjustice.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/Scm_guidelines_06092019.pdf (Last accessed on 21.04.2021).
48Annual Report, 2020-2021, Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Social Justice and
http://socialjustice.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/ANNUAL_REPORT_2021_ENG.pdf , (Last accessed
on 23.04.2021).
49 Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Notification dated 2.04.2018, available at
http://socialjustice.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/Pre-Matric_Scholarship_haz.pdf (Last accessed on 21.04.2021).
48.       At the post matric level, the Central Sector Scholarship Scheme of Top Class
for SC Students, makes scholarships available to SC students who have secured
admission at IIMs, IITs, AIIMS, NITs, NLUs, other central government
institutions, institutions of national importance, etc. 50 The scholarship covers
tuition fee (capped at ₹2 lakhs per annum for private institutions), living expenses
at ₹2220 per month, allowance for books and stationery, and a computer and
accessories (capped at ₹45,000, as one time assistance). Eligibility criteria require
total family income from all sources to be less than ₹8,00,000 per annum. Under
this scheme, in 2020-21, the total budget allocation was ₹ 40 crores; of this, as on
31.12.2020 ₹ 24.03 crores were spent on 1550 beneficiaries.51 For the previous
years, i.e. 2016-17 to 2019-2020, the total allocated budget was ₹ 131.50 crores,
with a total expenditure of ₹ 127.62 crores, on 6676 beneficiaries.52
49. Similar pre-matric and post-matric scholarships are also available to ST
students. At the state level too, various such scholarship schemes are made
available to SC and ST students, and students belonging to minority communities
and backward classes.53Similar pre-matric and post-matric scholarships are also
available to ST students. At the state level too, various such scholarship schemes
are made available to SC and ST students, and students belonging to minority
communities and backward classes.54 In respect of the post-matric scholarship for
ST students, for the financial year 2020-21, an amount of ₹1833 crores was
50Scheme          List,      Ministry     of    Social    Justice     and    Empowerment,      available     at
http://socialjustice.nic.in/SchemeList/Send/27?mid=24541 (Last accessed on 21.04.2021).
51Annual Report, 2020-2021, pg. 68, Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Social Justice and
http://socialjustice.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/ANNUAL_REPORT_2021_ENG.pdf ,          (Last accessed on
53See generally, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1593767 (Last accessed on 21.04.2021).
54See generally, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1593767 (Last accessed on 21.04.2021).
budgeted, out of which ₹1829.08 crore was released.55 For the pre-matric
scholarship for ST students, for the financial year 2020-21, an amount of ₹250
crores was budgeted, out of which ₹248.9 crores were released.
50. Under the Central Scholarship Scheme of Top-Class for ST students, in the
year 2020-2021, a total budget of ₹29.31 Crores was allocated, out of which ₹20
Crore was disbursed among 2449 (1973 male and 512 female) beneficiaries. 56 In
the year 2019-2020, a total budget of ₹20 Crores was allocated, with disbursement
of ₹19.1 Crores to 1914 beneficiaries.57 The State of Telangana had the highest
number of beneficiaries, at 988, followed by Rajasthan at 363 and Andhra Pradesh
at 147. The States of Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh had 69 and 49 beneficiaries
51. Under the National Fellowship Scheme for ST students (at higher levels of
education such as Ph.D., M.Phil), an amount of ₹90.78 Cr was disbursed to 2525
fellowship scholars.59 Under the National Overseas Scholarship for ST students, for
post-graduate study abroad, in the year 2020-21, an amount of ₹4.76 crore was
52. In respect of Other Backward Classes (OBCs), central government pre-
matric and post-matric (Class 11-12th and above) are available, for students whose
parents’/guardian’s income from all sources does not exceed ₹2.5 lakhs. Under the
pre-matric scholarship, ₹100/- per month for 10 months is given to day scholars
and ₹500/- per month for 10 months is given to hostellers. For the year 2020-2021
(as on 31.12.2020) a total budget of ₹175 crore was allocated, out of which
55Post-Matric Scholarship, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, data available at https://dashboard.tribal.gov.in/ (Last
accessed on 23.04.2021).
₹118.09 crore was provided to 200 lakh beneficiaries. In the previous years, from
2015-16 to 2019-20, a total of ₹759.9 crore was allocated, out of which ₹701.42
Crores was released to 463.08 lakh beneficiaries.61
53. Under the post-matric scholarship for OBCs, for the year 2020-2021, a total
budget of ₹1100 crore was allocated, out of which, ₹802.27 crores were provided
to 80 lakh beneficiaries. In the previous years, from 2015-16 to 2019-20, a total
budget of ₹5,035.75 crore was allocated, out of which ₹4,827.89 crore was
released for 207.96 lakh beneficiaries.62
54. A national fellowship is also available to OBC students at the degree levels
of M.Phil and Ph.D. Fellowships are awarded to research students, at ₹31,000 per
month for junior research fellows and at ₹35,000 per month for senior research
fellows. Under this fellowship, for the year 2020-21, a budget of ₹45 crore was
allocated, out of which ₹18 crore is expected to be provided to 2900 anticipated
beneficiaries. In the previous years, from 2016-17 to 2019-20, ₹149.5 crore was
allocated, out of which approx. ₹154 crore was provided to 7,200 beneficiaries
55. A report of the NITI Aayog64, based on data from the 2001 Census, analysed
that the gap between literacy rates of the general population and that of the SC
population had not reduced over the years. The rate of school drop-outs was seen
as a crucial indicator of lack of educational development. The dropout rates for SC
children were seen to be very high – 32.7% in Classes I to V; 55.2% in Classes I to
VIII; and 69.1% in classes I to X in 2004–05. The gap between the SC population
61Annual Report, 2020-2021, Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment,                          p.                104-105,                  available                  at
http://socialjustice.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/ANNUAL_REPORT_2021_ENG.pdf          (Last   accessed   on
62Ibid., at p. 105.
64Available at https://niti.gov.in/planningcommission.gov.in/docs/plans/planrel/fiveyr/11th/11_v1/11v1_ch6.pdf
(Last accessed on 21.04.2021).
and the general category was seen to increase at higher levels of schooling. Data on
dropout rates for ST students in the year 2006-07 shows that the primary level
(Class I-V), 33.2% ST students drop out. At the elementary level (Class I – VIII),
this increases to 62.5%, while at the secondary level (Class I- X), the drop-out rate
is 78.7%.65 For the same time frame, the drop out rates for SC students at the
primary level was 36%; at the elementary level, 53.1%; and at the secondary level,
69%.66According to the Annual Report (Periodic Labour Force Survey) for the year
2018-19, the literacy rate for age 7 and above was 69.4% for STs, 72.2% for SCs,
77.5% for OBCs, and 85.9% for others.67
56. This data makes a case for an intensive study into diverse areas such as the
adequacy or otherwise of scholarships, quantum disbursed, eligibility criteria (the
maximum family income limit of ₹ 2,50,000/- possibly excludes large segments of
beneficiaries, given that even Group D employment in the Central Government can
result in exclusion of any scholarships to children of such employees), and
reconsideration about introducing other facilities, such as incentivising
scholarships, grants and interest free or extremely low interest education loans to
widen the net of recipients and beneficiaries. States and the Union government
may also revisit the threshold limits and their tendency to exclude otherwise
deserving candidates. For instance, even if an SC/ST or SEBC household has an
income of ₹ 6,00,000/- year, the denial of scholarship to a deserving student from
that background cannot equate her or him with another candidate, whose family
65Reports and Publications, Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation, available at
http://mospi.nic.in/sites/default/files/reports_and_publication/cso_research_and_publication_unit/COSIOIESIOTSD
VOL-2/Pages%20from%20educations-1.13.pdf (Last accessed on 22.04.2021).
66Reports and Publications, Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation, available at
http://mospi.nic.in/sites/default/files/reports_and_publication/cso_research_and_publication_unit/COSIOIESIOTSD
VOL-2/Pages%20from%20educations-1.12.pdf(Last accessed on 22.04.2021).
67Table      49,     Annual       Report      (Periodic    Labour    Force    Survey)    2018-19,    available at
http://mospi.nic.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/Annual_Report_PLFS_2018_19_HL.pdf, p. A-363 (Last
accessed on 22.04.2021).
income might be four times that amount, and who might be able to pay annual fees
for medical education, in private educational institutions. In other words, there
needs to be constant scrutiny, review and revision of these policies and their
effectiveness, besides the aspect of increasing funding, etc.
The wider possibilities of affirmative action- USA, South Africa and Canada
57.     In the US, in Fullilove v. Klutznick,68 the US Supreme Court rejected a
challenge to the constitutionality of a federal law demanding preferential treatment
of minority-owned businesses through a racial quota system. The challenged law 69
prescribed pre-conditions for receipt of state and local government public works
grants upon the private entity's assurance that at least 10% of the amount of each
grant would be spent on contracts with minority business enterprises (MBEs).
Public contracts normally were awarded to the lowest bidder; the provision
operated to grant public works contracts to the lowest bidder who complied with
the 10% set-aside (quota) goal. The executive policy framed pursuant to the Act
imposed upon those receiving grants and their prime contractors an affirmative
duty to seek out and employ available, qualified, and bona fide MBEs. As the
objective of the MBE provision was to overcome longstanding barriers to minority
participation in public contracting opportunities, the set-aside provision i.e.
condition favoured a higher MBE bid as long as the higher price reflected inflated
costs resulting from past disadvantage and discrimination. The administrative
program therefore authorized the Economic Development Agency to waive the
minority participation requirement where a high minority business bid is not
attributable to the present effects of past discrimination. The plaintiffs in Fullilove
69 Section 103(f)(2), Public Works Employment Act of 1977
were non-minority associations of construction contractors and subcontractors.
They alleged that enforcement of the Public Works Act's MBE requirement caused
economic injury to the non-minority business plaintiffs. In addition, the plaintiffs
asserted that the MBE 10% quota provision violated the equal protection clause of
the fourteenth amendment and the equal protection element of the due process
clause of the fifth amendment.
58. The US Supreme Court held that the interference with the business
opportunities of non-minority firms caused by the 10% set-aside program did not
render the Act constitutionally defective. The Court rejected the alleged equal
protection violation on the grounds that the Act ensured equal protection of the
laws by providing minority businesses an equal opportunity to participate in
federal grants. The later decision Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Penal70 held that
federal affirmative action programs are now subject to strict scrutiny, just as state
and local programs were since 1989. The court held that “federal racial
classifications, like those of a state, must serve a compelling governmental
interest, and must be narrowly tailored to further that interest.”
59.     Under South Africa’s Constitution of 1998, Chapter 2, Article 9(3) dealing
"The state may not unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against
any one on one or more grounds, including race, gender, sex,
pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual
orientation, age, disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture,
language and birth".
Chapter 10 says that public administration "must be broadly
representative of the South African people, with objectivity [and]
fairness," and it needs "to redress the imbalances of the past to
achieve broad representation”.
60.    In furtherance of these provisions, in October 1998, the Employment Equity
Act was legislated. The Act starts with the premise that "pronounced
disadvantages" created by past policies cannot be redressed by a simple repeal of
past discriminatory laws, and there was a need to enforce "employment equity to
redress the effects of discrimination," and "achieve a diverse workforce broadly
representative" of the people of South Africa. The Act has two purposes: (1) to
promote "equal opportunity and fair treatment in employment through the
elimination of unfair discrimination," and (2) to implement "affirmative action
measures to redress the disadvantages in employment experienced by designated
groups, in order to ensure their equitable representation in all occupational
categories and levels in the workforce." Designated groups are defined as black
people (who include Africans, Coloureds and Indians), women, and people with
disabilities.
61. Affirmative action measures for designated groups must include
identification and removal of barriers adversely affecting them, actions to further
diversity, reasonable accommodations to ensure equal opportunity and equitable
representation, and efforts at training to retain and develop them. Representation is
extended to all occupational categories and levels in the workforce and this is to be
ensured through preferential treatment and numerical goals, but not with quotas.
The Employment Equity Plan itself must state the objectives to be achieved each
year, the affirmative action measures with timetables and strategies to be
implemented to accomplish them, and the procedure to evaluate the plan. Each
plan ought not to be for a period of less than one year, and not longer than five
years. (At the expiration of one plan, another may follow.) While preferential
treatment is meant for only suitably qualified people, such suitability may be a
product of formal qualifications, prior learning, relevant experience, or capacity to
acquire, within a reasonable time, the ability to do the job.
62. Under the Employment Equity Act, employers must consult with their
employees and representative trade unions, after which an audit of employment
policies and practices in the workplace must be undertaken. Analysis of the
information garnered in the audit is meant to assist in developing demographic
profiles of the work force, and identifying barriers to the employment or
advancement of designated groups. Under-representation of designated groups in
all categories of work must also be identified. Quotas are expressly prohibited
under Section 15(3) of the Act. In 2003, the Black Economic Empowerment Act
was legislated. This Act has as its purpose the "economic empowerment of all
black people, including women, workers, youth, people with disabilities and people
living in rural areas". To measure compliance with black economic empowerment
(BEE) requirements, the Department of Trade and Industry uses a balanced
scorecard, consisting of three broad components. The scorecard will be used for
government procurement, public-private partnerships, sale of state-owned
enterprises, when licenses are applied for, and for any other relevant economic
activity. Strategies aimed at levelling the playing field may include the elimination
of employment barriers such as adapting testing requirements to compensate for
educational disadvantage or lack of work experience 71; reviewing recruitment,
selection and promotion procedures to ensure fairness in job competition72;
accelerated and corrective training; and the transformation of work environments
that exclude or otherwise disadvantage designated groups, e.g. measures aimed at
71 Durban City Council (Physical Environment Service Unit) v. Durban Municipal Employees’ Society (DMES)
72 Durban Metro Council (Consolidated Billing) v. IMATU obo Van Zyl and Another (1998) 7 ARB 6.14. 1.
integrating career and family responsibilities73 (flexible work schedules, child care
structures, facilitating career breaks, etc).
63.     In Canadian National Railway Co v. Canada (Canadian Human Rights
Commission)74, Dickson J. reasoned that the purpose of an affirmative action
programme is to break a continuing cycle of systemic discrimination. The goal is
not to compensate past victims or even to provide new opportunities for specific
individuals who have been unfairly refused jobs or promotion in the past, but to
ensure that future applicants and workers from the affected groups will not face the
same insidious barriers that blocked their forebears.
64. In Ontario (Human Rights Commission) v Ontario (Ministry of Health) 75, the
Ontario Court of Appeal interpreted the affirmative action provisions of the
Ontario Human Rights Code 1990 and the Canadian Human Rights Act 1985, to
reinforce the important insight that substantive equality requires positive action to
ameliorate the conditions of disadvantaged groups. One of the important purposes
of the provisions is to protect affirmative action programmes from being
challenged as violating the formal equality provisions contained elsewhere in the
Code or Act. Affirmative action, according to the court, is aimed at
“achieving substantive equality by enabling or assisting
disadvantaged persons to acquire skills so that they can compete
equally for jobs on a level playing field with those who do not have
the disadvantage. The purpose of s. 14(l) is not simply to exempt or
protect affirmative action programs from challenge. It is also an
interpretative aid that clarifies the full meaning of equal rights by
promoting substantive equality”.76
73Kalanke v. Frete Hansestadt Bremen Case C-450/93 [1996] 1 CMLR 175 (ECJ) at 181.
74 [1987] 1 SCR 1114 at 1143.
75 (1994) 21 CHRR (Ont CA) D/259 at D/265, quoting with approval Sheppard ‘Litigating the relationship
between equity and equality’ (Study paper of the Ontario Law Reform Commission) Toronto (1993) 28.
76 (1994) 21 CHRR (Ont CA) D/259 at D/265.
Possibilities for Affirmative Action other than Reservation in India
65.    The US practice of encouraging diversity by incentivising it by for instance,
the award of government contracts to firms that have a good record of recruiting
members from racially or ethnically disadvantaged groups, has found echo in
policies in Madhya Pradesh. Other States such as UP, Bihar, Karnataka, AP and
Telangana have followed a policy of affirmative action in awarding contracts and
in that manner protecting SC and ST entrepreneurs’ entry into trade, business and
other public works as contractors. Recently, Karnataka enacted a legislation,
namely, the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement (Amendment) Act,
2016, which reserves 24.1% for SC and ST contracts in all Government works,
public contracts up to ₹ 50 lakh. This law aims to ensure the presence of SC and
ST contractors and to get the award of Government work without rigid tender
process. Orissa, too provides for a price preference to SC/ST entrepreneurs to the
extent of 10% of contracts of a certain value.
66.    There is empirical evidence, in India, in different sectors that access to
productive employment is confined to a few sections of the workforce, among the
most backward of classes, while the rest eke out a living in the informal economy.
The faultlines of division between those who are employed in good jobs and those
who are “excluded” run deep, and are based on caste, religion, region, and other
sectarian divisions all of which overlap with class and gender, such that even
within the small section of the workforce which is productively employed in
decent jobs, some groups are better represented than others, placed higher than
others, while some castes and communities are practically absent in the top
echelons of the private corporate sector. While private employers firmly believe
that jobs should be allocated on the basis of individual merit, their views about
how merit is distributed overlaps strongly with existing stereotypes around caste,
religion, gender and regional differences.
67.     A method by which the private sector can substantively contribute to
alleviate discrimination and inequality, is through its corporate social responsibility
(CSR) programmes. CSR has been compulsory in India since 2013. These
initiatives have taken two major forms: education of the under-privileged either
through special schools or other programmes to support school-going children, and
support to poor women through home-based work or micro-finance. While these
measures are significant, there are other spheres where CSR could be directed,
with even greater benefits. The definition and scope of CSR needs to be broadened
to include measures to counteract the natural tendencies towards exclusion of
certain groups. Private sector managements need to show sensitivity to societal
patterns of exclusion and must consciously make an attempt not to fall prey
dominant social stereotypes, which penalize people due to their birth into
stigmatizing jobs, even if they might be individually qualified and competent.
68.     In addition to being sensitized to the problem of under-representation at the
time of employment (by actively pursuing policies to promote and/or by equal
opportunity employment policies), private companies can also pay attention to
supplier diversity in matters of procurement. By encouraging supplies from firms
owned by SCs, STs, or those from backward class or deprived classes, the large
organized private sector in India could give a huge boost to the micro, medium and
small enterprises owned by entrepreneurs from such marginalized groups. Indeed,
this is also one of the planks used in the USA, for instance, where minority-owned
businesses are not only given active financial incentives by the government, but
larger firms are expected to source a part of their supplies from minority-owned
businesses. Given that typically, SC, ST and backward class individuals owned
micro enterprises are likely to employ greater proportion of persons from these
communities (as compared to enterprises owned by upper-caste groups), an active
supplier diversity programme would also boost employment.
69.    In view of all these developments, it is time that the states and the Union
government gather data about the extent and reach of the existing schemes for
employment, and in the field of education, take steps to ensure greater access, by
wherever necessary, increasing funding, increasing the number and extent of
coverage of scholarships, and setting up all manner of special institutions which
can train candidates aspiring for higher education, to increase their chances of
entry in admission tests, etc. Likewise, innovative employment incentives to the
private sector, especially in the manner of employment in contracts or projects
awarded by the state or its instrumentalities, need to be closely examined and
implemented. These welfare measures can also include giving tax incentives to
schemes that fund scholarships and easy (or interest free) loans to SC, ST and
SEBC students, which can enhance their access to educational institutions. Today,
even if an SC, or SEBC candidate secures admission in a common entrance
examination for a medical seat, in a private institution, the amounts charged as
annual fees would exclude most of such candidates (even those who are ineligible
to government scholarships, as being marginally above the threshold of ₹
2,50,000/- per annum annual family income). Other incentives, such as awarding
marks while evaluating private entities for the purpose of public tenders, and
giving them appropriate scores or advantage, if their workforce employs defined
percentages of SC/ST or SEBC individuals, etc. too would make a substantial
difference.
Re Point No (2) Whether Maharashtra State Reservation (of seats for admission
in educational institutions in the State and for appointments in the public
services and posts under the State) for Socially and Educationally Backward
Classes (SEBC) Act, 2018 as amended in 2019 granting 12% and 13%
reservation for Maratha community in addition to 50% social reservation is
covered by exceptional circumstances as contemplated by Constitution Bench in
and Re Point No (3) Whether the State Government on the strength of
Maharashtra State Backward Commission Report chaired by M.C. Gaikwad has
made out a case of existence of extraordinary situation and exceptional
circumstances in the State to fall within the exception carved out in the
70.     I agree, with respect, with the reasoning and conclusions of Ashok Bhushan,
J. on the above two points of reference and have nothing to add.
Re: Point No. 4 Whether Article 342 of the Constitution abrogates State power to
legislate or classify in respect of “any backward class of citizens” and thereby
affect the federal policy/structure of the Constitution of India? And
Point No. 5 Whether, States’ power to legislate in relation to “any backward
class” under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is anyway abridged by Article 342(A) read
with Article 366(26c) of the Constitution of India?
I.     Relevant provisions in consideration
71.    Both the above points of reference, by their nature, have to be and therefore,
are considered together. The Constitution (123rd Amendment) Bill, 2017, after its
passage became the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act,
2018; it received the assent of the President of India and came into force on
15.08.2018. The amendment inserted Articles 338B and 342A. These are
“338B. (1) There shall be a Commission for the socially and
educationally backward classes to be known as the National
Commission for Backward Classes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service
and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other
Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule
determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his
hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission— (a) to investigate and
monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the socially
and educationally backward classes under this Constitution or under
any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the
Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation
of rights and safeguards of the socially and educationally backward
(c) to participate and advise on the socio-economic development of
the socially and educationally backward classes and to evaluate the
progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those
(e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the measures
that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective
implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the
protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the socially
and educationally backward classes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection,
welfare and development and advancement of the socially and
educationally backward classes as the President may, subject to the
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the
Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter
with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report
shall be forwarded to the State Government which shall cause it to be
laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum
explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to
in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-
clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a
suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any
part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting the socially and
educationally backward classes."
"342A. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union
territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor
thereof, by public notification, specify the socially and educationally
backward classes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be
deemed to be socially and educationally backward classes in relation
to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List
of socially and educationally backward classes specified in a
notification issued under clause (1) any socially and educationally
backward class, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the
said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification."
72.     Article 366(26C), which defined “socially and educationally backward
classes “too was inserted; it is reproduced below, for the sake of reference:
‘366. Definitions.-In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following expressions have the meanings hereby
respectively assigned to them, that is to say-
(26C) "socially and educationally backward classes" means such
backward classes as are so deemed under article 342A for the
73.     The Bill which was moved in Parliament by which the 102 ndamendment was
introduced, interalia, stated as follows:
2.       Vide the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, a
separate National Commission for Scheduled Tribes was created by
inserting a new article 338A in the Constitution. Consequently, under
article 338 of the Constitution, the reference was restricted to the
National Commission for the Scheduled Castes. Under clause (10) of
article 338 of the Constitution, the National Commission for
Scheduled Castes is presently empowered to look into the grievances
and complaints of discrimination of Other Backward Classes also.
3.       In the year 1992, the Supreme Court of India in the matter of
Indra Sawhney and others Vs. Union of India and others (AIR 1993,
SC 477) had directed the Government of India to constitute a
permanent body for entertaining, examining and recommending
requests for inclusion and complaints of over-inclusion and under-
inclusion in the Central List of Other Backward Classes. Pursuant to
the said Judgment, the National Commission for Backward Classes
Act was enacted in April, 1993 and the National Commission for
Backward Classes was constituted on 14th August, 1993 under the
said Act. At present the functions of the National Commission for
Backward Classes is limited to examining the requests for inclusion of
any class of citizens as a backward class in the Lists and hear
complaints of over-inclusion or under-inclusion of any backward class
in such lists and tender such advice to the Central Government as it
deems appropriate. Now, in order to safeguard the interests of the
Socially and Educationally Backward Classes more effectively, it is
proposed to create a National Commission for Backward Classes with
constitutional status at par with the National Commission for
Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.
4.       The National Commission for the Scheduled Castes has
recommended in its Report for 2014-15 that the handling of the
grievances of the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes under
clause (10) of article 338 should be given to the National Commission
for Backward Classes.
5.       In view of the above, it is proposed to amend the Constitution
of India, inter alia, to provide the following, namely:—
(a) to insert a new article 338 so as to constitute the National
Commission for Backward Classes which shall consist of a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members. The said
Commission will hear the grievances of Socially and Educationally
Backward Classes, a function which has been discharged so far by the
National Commission for Scheduled Castes under clause (10) of
(b) to insert a new article 342A so as to provide that the President
may, by public notification, specify the Socially and Educationally
Backward Classes which shall for the purposes of the Constitution be
deemed to be Socially and Educationally Backward Classes.”
74.    The appellants argue that the Maharashtra SEBC Act (which was enacted
and brought into force on 30.11.2018), could not have been enacted, and is clearly
void. It is argued that on a plain reading of Article 342A read with Article
366(26C), it is clear that States were denuded of their power to identify backward
classes and the task was to be performed exclusively by the National Commission
for Backward Classes set up under Article 338B (hereafter “NCBC”). Mr. Arvind
Datar, Mr. Shyam Divan and Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned senior counsel
emphasized that the expression “for the purposes of this Constitution” under
Article 366(26C) and Article 342A(1) can only imply that the States’ jurisdiction
and power to identify a community as a backward class stood denuded.
Consequently, it is only upon the recommendation of the NCBC that any
community can henceforth be included in the list of SEBCs. It was submitted that
by virtue of Article 342A, even the Union or the Central Government ceases to
have any power to modify, add to or delete from the list so notified under Article
342A(1). It is Parliament alone which can make such modification, deletion or
alteration. The term ‘Central List’ in Article 342(2) is not the list published by the
Union for the affairs of the Union. The Constitution has used the word “Union”
wherever the reference is made to the Government of India or Central Government,
i.e., Articles 53, 73, 79, 309, List I of Schedule VII whereas the word ‘Central
Government’ has been used recently in certain amendments which is not the
expression used in the Constitution originally adopted. Thus, the reference to
“Central List” means only the List in relation to states and union territories, for the
purpose of the Constitution notified under Article 342A (1).
75. Learned senior counsel argued that the decision in Indra Sawhney (supra)77
had required the setting up of permanent Commissions for identifying communities
or castes such as backward classes to enable their notification by their respective
governments. In the light of this recommendation and having regard to the
principal existing provision under Article 340, Parliament had enacted the National
Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 (hereafter “the NCBC Act”). That
enactment used the expression, “Central list” in Section 2(c)78.
77Paras 847, 855 (c) and 859 (13)- SCC report.
78Defined as “lists” means lists prepared by the Government of India from time to time for purposes of making
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of backward classes of citizens which, in the opinion
of that Government, are not adequately represented in the services under the Government of India and any local or
76.      Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that while amending the
Constitution, the expression “Central List” meant the List to be published by the
President on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers, after consultation with
the Governors, i.e., the aid and advice of the State Governments. Thus, having
regard to plain language of Article 366(26C) and Article 342A as well as the
provisions in Article 338B (7), (8) and (9), there is no question of the State
Governments or State Legislatures retaining any power to identify backward
classes. That power is with the President.
77. It was submitted by Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayan, learned senior counsel that
the object which impelled the Constitution (102 ndAmendment) Act, 2018 appears
to be to set up a national body for evolving scientific criteria of uniform
application with regard to the identification of communities as backward classes. It
was submitted that the frequent demands by various communities to be included in
the list of backward classes to garner/gain access to State funded institutions and
for public employment meant that States either succumb to such pressure or apply
ad-hoc criteria and set up ad-hoc bodies which did not or could not consider issues
in a dispassionate and holistic manner. Learned counsel relied upon the decision of
this Court in Ram Singh &Ors. v. Union of India (supra) 79 to say that demands
made by such communities led to States providing special reservation, which
became the subject matter of judicial scrutiny.
78. Learned counsel also referred to agitations for inclusion of communities in
other States such as Rajasthan which also led to repeated litigation. It was,
other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India;
79“54. The perception of a self-proclaimed socially backward class of citizens or even the perception of the
"advanced classes" as to the social status of the "less fortunates" cannot continue to be a constitutionally
permissible yardstick for determination of backwardness, both in the context of Articles 15(4) and 16(4) of the
Constitution. Neither can any longer backwardness be a matter of determination on the basis of mathematical
formulae evolved by taking into account social, economic and educational indicators. Determination of
backwardness must also cease to be relative; possible wrong inclusions cannot be the basis for further inclusions
but the gates would be opened only to permit entry of the most distressed. Any other inclusion would be a serious
abdication of the constitutional duty of the State.”
therefore, argued that to avoid these instances, and to ensure that a national
standard for considering the relevant indicia for backwardness is constitutionally
applied, an amendment to the Constitution was made. Learned counsel urged that
the position adopted by the States, i.e., that they were not denuded of executive and
legislative power and that the amendment only sought to give additional
constitutional status to the existing NCBC is unfounded. It was pointed out that
before the coming into force of the Constitution (102ndAmendment) Act, 2018,
Article 340 existed under the original Constitution. Parliament, in exercise of its
legislative power, enacted the NCBC Act. The NCBC had existed for 27 years and
had conducted surveys and identified several communities as backward. The lists
published by it were in existence and were in use by the Central Government for its
purposes, including in public employment. Undoubtedly, not all communities
included in the States’ lists were part of the NCBC list. However, the list was
broadly common to a large extent. Learned counsel emphasized that there was no
necessity for bringing any constitutional amendment if the new Commission were
to be given constitutional status and the lists published by it, made binding only on
the Central Government which was to acquire such high degree of status that it
could be modified by Parliament alone. It was submitted that surely, State
interference with the Central list did not warrant such a drastic measure as a
constitutional amendment.
79. Mr. Sankaranarayanan submitted that although there are passages in the
report of the Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha, Parliament had discussed the
amendment and taken into account the views of certain individuals; the fact
remains that it is the text of the Constitution as amended, which is to be
interpreted. Learned counsel relied upon the decisions reported as State of
Travancore-Cochin v. Bombay Company Ltd80; Aswini Kumar Ghose &Anr. v.
Arabinda Ghose & Anr.81and P.V. Narasimha Rao v. State82. He also referred to the
decision in Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. &Anr83.It was
submitted that the consistent opinion of this Court has been the one adopted in
Pepper v. Hart84, which permits reference to the statements made in the House at
the time of the introduction of Bill as an aid to construction of legislation which is
ambiguous or obscure, and not in any other circumstances. It was thus submitted
that the intention of the amendment was to ensure that a uniform standard and one
aware of looking at backwardness in an objective manner, was to be adopted and
applied, for the purposes of the Constitution. This also was aimed at eliminating
the mischief that led to the introduction of communities as a consequence of
protests – having been triggered by political considerations on the eve of elections.
80. The submissions articulated on behalf of the respondent States by Mr. Mukul
Rohatgi, Mr. Kapil Sibal, Dr. A.M. Singhvi and Mr. Naphade, Additional
Advocates General and Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of the various
States, was that the interpretation suggested by the appellants is drastic. It was
emphasized that the States’ responsibility under Article 15(4) and 16(4) to make
special provisions including reservations is undeniable. In the absence of any
amendment to these provisions, learned counsel submitted that the Constitution
(102ndAmendment) Act, 2018 cannot be so interpreted as to denude the States of
their powers altogether. Learned counsel submitted that pursuant to the
recommendations and directions in Indra Sawhney (supra), not only was the
NCBC Act enacted; in addition, different States also set up permanent
commissions to identify communities as backward classes for the purpose of
Constitution. Those Commissions were set up in exercise of legislative powers
traceable to one or the other Entry in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution. The plenary legislative power of the States remains unaltered. That
being the case, this Court should not accept the appellants’ submission that Articles
338B and 342A place fetters upon the exercise of such legislative power as well as
executive power of the States.
81. Learned counsel submitted that this Court should closely examine the
contents of the report of the Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha, and the
statements made by the Government, particularly that the power and jurisdiction of
the States would remain unaffected. It was further urged that this Court can and
should and ought to have looked into the contents of these reports to discern the
true meaning and intent behind the Constitution (One Hundred and Second
Amendment) Act, 2018, which was not to disrupt the existing legislative
arrangement between the Centre and the State. In this regard, learned counsel
placed reliance upon the judgment of this Court in Kalpana Mehta and Ors. v.
Union of India and Ors.85,and submitted that the Court can take aid of reports of
Parliamentary Committees for the purpose of appreciating the historical
background of statutory provisions, and also to resolve the ambiguity in the
legislation.
82. It was submitted that if the matter were to be considered in the true
perspective and the report of the Select Committee, examined as an aid to
interpretation of the Constitution (102ndAmendment) Act, 2018, especially Article
342A, it would be apparent that the Parliament never intended, by the amendment,
to disturb the existing order and denude the States of their executive or legislative
power to identity backward classes while making special provisions under Articles
15(4) and 16(4). It was submitted that Indra Sawhney (supra) only created a larger
movement for the setting-up of Commissions by the Union and the States. Learned
counsel emphasized that even while identifying the communities for the purpose of
the Central List, the views of the States were always ascertained. Parliament
merely sought to replicate the amendment by which collection of data has been
undertaken under Article 338 (in relation to SCs). The introduction of Article 338B
was in line with the introduction of Articles 338A and 338 – which enables the
setting-up of National Commissions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes(the latter through another amendment which was brought into force on
83. It was submitted that Articles 366(26C), 338B and 342A(1) have to,
therefore, be read harmoniously in the light of the expression “Central List” which
occurs in Article 342A(2). This would be in keeping with the debates and
assurances held out in the Select Committee report that States’ power would
continue to remain unaffected. It was submitted that such construction would result
in a harmonious interpretation of all provisions of the Constitution.
84. The learned Attorney General, appearing on account of notice issued by this
Court, urged that the 102nd Amendment did not bring about a radical change in the
power of identification of backward classes, in relation to states, and that this
power continues to remain with states. He submitted that the comparison by the
appellants, with the powers conferred by Article 338 and the Presidential power
under Article 341 and Article 342, is inapt, because those were original provisions
of the Constitution, having a historical background. It was submitted that the states’
responsibilities to uplift the lot of weaker sections, apparent from the directive
principle under Article 46, is through affirmative policies under Articles 15(4) and
16(4). To alter this balance, which had existed from the beginning of the coming
into force of the Constitution, is too drastic, and nothing in the debates leading to
the 102nd Amendment, or in any material, such as the Select Committee Report,
suggests that end.
85. The learned Attorney General also submitted that the object of the 102 nd
amendment was to ensure that a commission with constitutional status would
periodically examine the needs of socially and educationally backward classes
(“SEBC” hereafter), and suggest inclusion or exclusion of such classes, in a list for
the purposes of Central Government, or central public sector corporation
employment, and extension of other benefits under union educational and other
institutions, under Articles 15 (4) and 16 (4). In case such a list is drawn and
published under Article 342A (1), it is only Parliament that has the power to
modify it. This does not, in any manner disturb or take away the states’ power to
identify or include communities as backward classes of citizens for the purposes of
benefits that they wish to extend to them, through state policies and legislation, or
for reservation in state employment under Article 16 (4). He highlighted that the
term “Unless the context otherwise requires” is the controlling phrase, which
precedes the definition of various terms under Article 366 of the Constitution.
Therefore, if the context is different- as is evident from Article 342A (2), by the use
of the term “Central List”, that should be given meaning, and the interpretation
based on that meaning should prevail in the construction of the entire provision
86. The learned Attorney General further argued that this court had specifically
recognized the states’ power to identify, make special provisions, and reservations,
in Indra Sawhney. He urged that the 102nd Amendment was not meant to limit this
constitutional obligation of the states, but rather to streamline the method of
identification of socially and educationally backward class of citizens, for the
purpose of central employment, and centrally funded and sponsored schemes,
institutions and facilities. It was urged that this is apparent from the use of the
expression “Central List” in Article 342A (2), which has to guide the interpretation
of the list referred to in Article 342A (1).
III. Provisions relating to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, in the
87.      Before proceeding with the interpretation of the provisions of the 102 nd
Amendment, it would be useful to briefly recapitulate the provisions that existed
for the identification of SCs and STs. Before the Constitution was framed, the
Government of India Act, by Section 26 defined SCs 86. One Dr. J.H. Hutton, a
Census Commissioner of India, framed a list of the depressed classes
systematically, and that list was made the basis of an order promulgated by the
British Government in India called the Government of India (Scheduled Castes)
Order, 1936. This court, in one of its decisions noticed that such list became the
basis for the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.87 Article 338 as
originally enacted, provided for appointment of a special officer for the SCs and
STs to investigate all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the SCs and
STs under the Constitution and to report to the President on their working. In 1990,
this position changed, and the Constitution (Sixty Fifth) Amendment Act was
enacted to create a five-member commission under Article 338. The statement of
objects88 envisioned that such a commission would be
“a more effective arrangement in respect of the constitutional
safeguards for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes than a single
Special Officer as at present. It is also felt that it is necessary to
elaborate the functions of the said Commission so as to cover
measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the
effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for
the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.”
88.      The composite Commission for SCs and STs was bifurcated by another
amendment- the Constitution (Eighty Ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, which inserted
86" the scheduled castes " means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes,
being castes, races, tribes, parts or groups, which appear to His Majesty in Council to correspond to the classes of
persons formerly known as " the depressed classes", as His Majesty in Council may specify”
87Soosai Etc vs Union of India1985 Supp (3) SCR 242.
88Statement of Objects and Reasons, Constitution Sixty fifth Amendment Act, 1990
Article 338A, enabling the creation of a commission exclusively to consider
measures and make recommendations for amelioration of STs. Article 338B has
now been introduced through the 102nd amendment, which is in issue.
89.    The relevant provisions relating to SCs and STs under the Constitution are
366. Definitions.-In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following expressions have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to
(24) “Scheduled Castes” means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or
groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under Article 341 to
be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution;”
(25) “Scheduled Tribes” means such tribes or tribal communities or parts
of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under
article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this Constitution;”
338. [National Commission for Scheduled Castes] (1) There shall be a
Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Castes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other
Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand
and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission —
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided
for the Scheduled Castes under this Constitution or under any other law for
the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to evaluate
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights
and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic
development of the Scheduled Castes and to evaluate the progress of their
development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should
be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those
safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-
economic development of the Scheduled Castes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes as the President may,
subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of
Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-
clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular
in respect of the following matters, namely :—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on
all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes.”
Before the 102nd Amendment Act, the following sub-Article formed part of
“(10) In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes and to such
other backward classes as the President may, on receipt of the report
of a Commission appointed under clause (1) of article 340, by order
specify and also shall be construed as including references to the
Anglo-Indian community.”
By the 102nd Amendment Act, the words “and to such other backward classes as
the President may, on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under
clause (1) of article 340, by order specify” were deleted89. The other provisions
relating to SCs and STs are as follows:
“338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.—
89By Section 2 which is as follows: “2. In article 338 of the Constitution, in clause (10), the words, brackets and
figures "to such other backward classes as the President may, on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed
under clause (1) of article 340, by order specify and also" shall be omitted”.
(1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Tribes to be known
as the National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service
and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other
Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule
determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his
hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission— (a) to investigate and
monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the
Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution or under any other law for
the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to
evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation
of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Tribes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-
economic development of the Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the
progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those
(e) to make in such reports recommendation as to the measures that
should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective
implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the
protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection,
welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as
the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the
Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such
recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter
with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report
shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to
be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum
explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to
in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-
clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a
suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any
part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes.]
341. Scheduled Castes-(1) The President may with respect to any
State or Union territory, and where it is a State after consultation with
the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the castes, races
or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled
Castes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause ( 1 )
any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or
tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause
shall not be varied by any subsequent notification
342. Scheduled Tribes -(1) The President may with respect to any
State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation
with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the tribes or
tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal
communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be
deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union
territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause ( 1 )
any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or
tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the
said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.”
IV.     Previous commissions set up to identify SEBCs
90.     It would be useful at this stage to recollect that before Indra Sawhney, two
commissions were set up at the national level, to examine and make suitable
recommendations in respect of identification of other backward classes. These
were the Kaka Kalelkar Commission90 and the B.P. Mandal Commission91. The
Kalelkar Commission, after an exhaustive survey and study, through its report,
identified 2399 backward groups and recommended several measures for their
advancement, as steps that could be taken by the Union and the states. The Mandal
Commission report identified individuals belonging to 3,743 different castes and
communities, as “backward”.
V.      Interpretation of provisions similar to Article 342A- i.e. Articles 341 and
90 Set up by the Central Government, in January 1953.
91 Set up by the Central Government on 1 January, 1979.
91.     The consistent view while interpreting Articles 341 and 342 has been that
the power which the Constitution conferred is initially upon the President, who,
after the introduction of the 65 th and 89th Amendments and the insertion of Articles
338 and 338A, is aided in the task of identification of the SCs and STs, by two
separate Commissions, to include or exclude members claiming to be SCs or STs.
The view of this Court has been that once a determination has been done, no court
can, by interpretive process, or even the executive through its policies, include
members of other communities as falling within a particular class or described
community or even in any manner extend the terms of the determination under
Articles 341 or 342. The power to further include, or modify contents of the
existing list (of SC/STs) is with Parliament only [by reason of Article341 (2) and
Article 342 (2)] This position has been consistently followed in a series of
decisions. Likewise, in the interpretation as to which communities are categorized
as SCs or STs, this Court has been definite, i.e. that only such classes or
communities who specifically fall within one or the other lists, that constitute SCs
or such STs for the purpose of this Constitution under Article 366(24) and Article
366 (25). This has been established in the decision of this Court in Bhaiya
Lal v. Harikishan Singh92; Basavalingappa v Munichinnappa93 and Kishori Lal
Hans v. Raja Ram Singh94The recent Constitution Bench decision in Bir Singh v.
Delhi Jal Board95, reiterated this position clearly:
“36. The upshot of the aforesaid discussion would lead us to the
conclusion that the Presidential Orders issued under Article 341 in
regard to Scheduled Castes and under Article 342 in regard to
Scheduled Tribes cannot be varied or altered by any authority
including the Court. It is Parliament alone which has been vested with
the power to so act, that too, by laws made. Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes thus specified in relation to a State or a Union
Territory does not carry the same status in another State or Union
Territory. Any expansion/deletion of the list of Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes by any authority except Parliament would be
against the constitutional mandate under Articles 341 and 342 of the
Constitution of India.
38. It is an unquestionable principle of interpretation that interrelated
statutory as well as constitutional provisions have to be harmoniously
construed and understood so as to avoid making any provision
nugatory and redundant. If the list of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes in the Presidential Orders under Articles 341/342 is subject to
alteration only by laws made by Parliament, operation of the lists of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beyond the classes or
categories enumerated under the Presidential Order for a particular
State/Union Territory by exercise of the enabling power vested by
Article 16(4)would have the obvious effect of circumventing the
specific constitutional provisions in Articles 341/342. In this regard, it
must also be noted that the power under Article 16(4) is not only
capable of being exercised by a legislative provision/enactment but
also by an Executive Order issued under Article 166 of the
Constitution. It will, therefore, be in consonance with the
constitutional scheme to understand the enabling provision under
Article 16(4) to be available to provide reservation only to the classes
or categories of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes enumerated in the
Presidential Orders for a particular State/Union Territory within the
geographical area of that State and not beyond. If in the opinion of a
State it is necessary to extend the benefit of reservation to a
class/category of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes beyond those
specified in the Lists for that particular State, constitutional discipline
would require the State to make its views in the matter prevail with the
central authority so as to enable an appropriate parliamentary
exercise to be made by an amendment of the Lists of Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes for that particular State. Unilateral action by
States on the touchstone of Article 16(4) of the Constitution could be a
possible trigger point of constitutional anarchy and therefore must be
held to be impermissible under the Constitution.”
VI.   Pre-102nd Amendment position in the Constitution in relation to SEBCs
92.    The original Constitution did not contain any special provision of like
manner as Articles 341 and 342. It did not define SEBCs. The only reference to
SEBCs was in Article 340, which enabled the Central Government to setup a
Commission for recommending measures for the progress and upliftment of
backward classes of citizens. That provision is as follows:
“340. Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of
(1) The President may by order appoint a Commission consisting of
such persons as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of socially
and educationally backward classes within the territory of India and
the difficulties under which they labour and to make recommendations
as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to
remove such difficulties and to improve their condition and as to the
grants that should be made for the purpose by the Union or any State
the conditions subject to which such grants should be made, and the
order appointing such Commission shall define the procedure to be
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred
to them and present to the President a report setting out the facts as
found by them and making such recommendations as they think proper
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented
together with a memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to
be laid before each House of Parliament”
93.    After the decision of this Court in Champakam Dorairajan v. State of
Madras96, Article 15 was amended and Article 15 (4) was introduced. The term
“socially and educationally backward class of citizens” was inserted, conferring
power upon the State to make special provisions for their advancement. This term
“socially and educationally backward” has been held to also provide colour the
term “backward class” in the decision in Indra Sawhney – as indeed in the earlier
decision in NM Thomas (supra). This court noticed that ‘backward class’ of
citizens, though wider in context, has to take colour from social backwardness,
which also results in educational backwardness.
94. Indra Sawhney in para 859 (13)97, had issued directions with regard to the
desirability of setting up Commissions by the Central and State Governments, to
ascertain the position and identification of backward class of citizens, evaluation of
rational criteria and periodic review of such lists. Pursuant to this direction,
Parliament introduced the NCBC Act, 1993. This Act defined ‘Central List’ under
Section 2(c). The terms of this enactment make it clear that the lists of backward
class of citizens prepared by the Commission and recommended to the Central
Government were to be for the purposes of providing reservations in employment
under Article 16(4), and for reservations and other ameliorate measures that the
Central Government can initiate and introduce under Article 15(4). Acting on the
recommendations of this court, post Indra Sawhney, several State Governments
appeared to have enacted other laws for setting up commissions for backward class
and backward caste groups98. In four States – Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Punjab and
Haryana, the Commissions were set up by executive action.
95. This Court had at the earlier part of this section, set out the provisions of
Article 366(26C), Article 338B and Article 342A. The Statement of Objects and
Reasons for the introduction of these provisions – referred to compendiously as the
102nd Amendment – do not indicate any concrete purpose for the insertion of those
provisions, except the general comment that Parliament wished to confer
constitutional status on the Commission for determination of SEBCs.
97SCC report.
98 The Maharashtra SCBC Act, 2006 is one such institution. The others are Karnataka State Commission for
Backward Classes, 1995; A.P. Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1995; U.P. State Commission for Backward
Classes Act, 1996; Kerala State Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993; Madhya Pradesh Rajya
PichdaVargAdhiniyam, 1995; Bihar State Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993; Assam Backward Classes
Commission Act, 1993; Orissa State Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993; West Bengal Commission for
Backward Classes Act, 1993; J&K State Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1997; Chhatisgarth Rajya Pichhda
Varga Adhiniyam, 1993 & Telangana Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993.
VII. The Constitution 123rd Amendment Bill, the 102nd Amendment Act and
report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
96.    Learned counsel for the respondents as indeed the appellants referred
extensively to the deliberations recorded in and assurances given, and reflected in
the Report of the Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha, submitted to the
Parliament at the time when the 123 rd amendment bill was introduced. A brief
reference of this can now be made. The introduction (to the Report dated (July
2017) disclosed that in all, seven meetings were held by the Select Committee.
The committee comprised 25 members, with a Secretariat of 7 officials. It took
note of statements made by three representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice,
two from the Department of Legal Affairs and three from the Legislative
97. The Report noted the background of introduction of the 123 rd Amendment
Bill including the amendments to Article 338 and the introduction of Article 338B.
It traces the history of the Backward Class Commissions set up under Article 340,
the office memoranda which led to the Judgment in Indra Sahwney, as well as the
direction by this Court in that Judgment regarding setting up of commissions. It
further noted the existing legal regime i.e., the NCBC Act, and noted that several
experts felt that there was no change or amendment needed to alter the existing
regime for identification of backward classes. In Para 20 of the Report, it was
noted that in the Fifth Consultation Meeting, the members had raised the concern
as to whether Article 342A(1) would exclude state consultation. The relevant para
“18. It was also submitted that the powers and functions of the State
Government and the State Backward Classes Commissions with
regard to identification, exclusion and inclusion of classes in the State
List should be clarified. Further, the process of consultation with the
Governor should also be clarified in the Bill.
19. In response to the above issues raised, the Ministry clarified that
sub-clause (9) of article 338B does not in any way interfere with the
powers of the State Governments to prepare their own list. The
Committee was further informed that classes so included in the State
Backward Classes List do not automatically come in the Central List
of OBCs.
20. In its fifth meeting representatives/Members raised a concern
about clause (1) of Article 342A, whether the list would be issued by
the President after consultation with the State Government or
consultation with only Governor of the State. It was clarified by the
Ministry that clause (1) of Article 154 and Article 163 of the
Constitution clearly state that the Governor shall act on the advice of
the Council of Ministers. It is also clarified that under the above
Constitutional provisions, the Governor shall exercise his authority
either directly or indirectly through officers of respective State
Government. Article 341 of Constitution provides for consultation
with Governor of State with respect to Scheduled Castes and Article
342 of the Constitution provides consultation of President with
Governor of State in respect of Scheduled Tribes. As is the practice,
at not time has the State Government been excluded in the
consultation process. It is always invariably the State Government
which recommends to the President the category of
inclusion/exclusion in Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Similar provision is provided for in the case of conferring of
constitutional status for backward classes for inclusion in Central list
of socially and educationally backward classes. Consultation with
Governor thereby implies consultation with the State Government.”
98.    In its clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill, the Committee noted the
apprehension with respect to setting up of a new Commission in Article 342B
instead of creating it under Article 340. In this context, a clarification was issued
that Article 340 enabled setting up of adhoc bodies like the Kaka Kalelkar
Commission and Mandal Commission, whereas Article 338B sought to confer
Constitutional status on a multi-member permanent body. Paras 31-34 of the
Report discussed the membership of the composition of the Commission under
Article 338B and also whether the NCBC Act would be repealed. Interestingly,
Para 47 reflects the discussion regarding an amendment by which new Sub-Article
10 was proposed to Article 338B. It read as follows:
“47. The Committee discussed the amendment wherein in article 338B
a new sub-clause (10) was proposed to be inserted. This sub-clause
‘Notwithstanding anything provided in clause 9, the State Government
shall continue to have powers to identify Socially and Educationally
99.    The Committee was satisfied, in the Report with the clarification issued by
the concerned Ministry in the following terms:
“48. It was clarified by the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment to the Committee that the proposed amendment does
not interfere with the powers of the State Governments to identify the
Socially and Educationally Backward Classes. The existing powers of
the State Backward Classes Commission would continue to be there
even after the passage of the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-
third Amendment) Bill, 2017.”
100. Para 50-53 (of the Report) set out proposals to amend Article 342A which
limited it to making provisions for reservations in appointments or posts under the
Government of India or under the authority of the Government of India and also
consequential amendment to Article 342A (2). Further, a proposed Article 342A(3)
sought to empower the State Government - i.e. the Governor which could by public
notification, specify SEBCs for the purposes of reservation of posts under the State
or under any authority of the State. A like amendment was proposed, i.e., Article
“the Governor may on the advice of the State Commission of
Backward Classes include or exclude from the State list of socially
and educationally backward classes specified in a notification issued
under Clause (3)”.
101. The other set of amendments discussed were firstly, to Article 342A(1) that
with respect to a State or Union Territory, the President could make inclusions
“with prior recommendation of the State Government, given due regard to such
recommendations”, and secondly, for the introduction of Article 342A(3) and (4)
enabling the State to issue public notifications - like in the case of Article 342A(1)
and the consequential amendment thereof through legislation alone, via proposed
102. Other amendments with respect to placing the report of the Commission
under Article 338B before both Houses of Parliament, consultation with the
governor to be based upon advice given to the governor by the state commission
for backward classes, and amendment of the list under Article 342A (1) being only
through a law based upon recommendations of the Commission under Article 338A
and 338B and also obliging and revision of the list in ten year periods, were
suggested.
103. All these were duly considered in the Committee’s Report and not accepted,
“54. The Ministry, on the amendments moved, clarified that time
bound decadal revision of lists by the proposed Commission, is a
continuous process. The Commission however, is empowered to
enquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of
right and safeguards of the socially and educationally backward
classes.
55. The Ministry clarified that the aspect of reservation of posts under
that State or under any other authority of the State or under the
control of the State, or seats in the educational institutions within that
State was beyond the purview of the instant Bill and hence the
amendments proposed are not allowed.
56. It was clarified by the Ministry that clause (1) of article 154 and
article 163 of the Constitution clearly state that Governor shall act on
the advice of the Council of Ministers. It was informed that under the
above Constitutional provisions the Governor shall exercise his
authority either directly or indirectly through officers of respective
State Government. Article 341 of Constitution provides for
consultation by the President with Governor of State with respect to
Scheduled Castes and article 342 of the Constitution provides
consultation by the President with Governor of State in respect of
Scheduled Tribes. As is the practice at no time has the State
Government been excluded in the consultation process. It is always
invariably the State Government which recommends to the President
the category of inclusion /exclusion in Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes. Similar provision is provided for in the case of
conferring of constitutional status for backward classes for inclusion
in Central list of SEBC. Consultation with Governor thereby implies
consultation with the State Government.
57. The Ministry also clarified to the Committee that the phrase “for
the purpose of this Constitution” as provided under clause (1) of
article 342A is on lines similar to articles 341 and 342 of the
Constitution. The setting up of the proposed Commission will not be
retrograde to the interest of the socially and educationally backward
classes. The article 342A will provide for a comprehensive
examination of each case of inclusion/exclusion from the Central List.
The ultimate power for such inclusion/exclusion would stand vested
with the Parliament.
58. The Committee held discussion on the proposed amendments and
in view of the detailed explanations furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee adopted the Clause 4 of the Bill without any amendments.
104. The section dealing with the amendment to Article 366 reads as follows:
“Clause 5:Provides for amendment of article 366
59. This Clause proposes to insert a new clause (26C) in article 366
“(26C) socially and educationally backward classes” means such
backward classes as are so deemed under article 342A for the
purposes of this Constitution;”
105. The Report of the Select Committee, made certain concluding general
observations, a part of which stated that:
“66. The Committee feels that the Constitutional Amendments
proposed in this Bill would further strengthen affirmative action in
favour of socially and educationally backward classes as well as
further boost concept of cooperative federalism between the Centre
and States.
67. The Committee observes that the amendments do not in any way
affect the independence and functioning of State Backward Classes
Commissions' and they will continue to exercise unhindered their
powers of inclusion/exclusion of other backward classes with relation
to State List.
68.      The Committee also took note of the concerns raised by some
Members regarding the composition of the Commission and would
like to impress upon the Ministry that while addressing the concerns
of the Members the rules framed for the Chairperson and Members of
the National Commission for Scheduled Casts and National
Commission for Scheduled Tribes may be taken into consideration.
The Committee is of the view that while framing the rules for
composition of the proposed Commission and selection of its
Chairperson it should be ensured that the persons belonging to
socially and educationally backward classes be given due
representation to inspire confidence amongst the socially and
educationally backward classes. It may further be ensured that at
least one-woman member is part of the Commission.
69.      The Committee hopes that the Bill would bring a sea change
by putting in place effective and efficient delivery mechanism for the
welfare of socially and educationally backward classes.”
VIII Extrinsic aids to interpretation of statutes: the extent to which they can be
106. The parties presented rival submissions with respect to interpretation of the
words of the statute in the light of the reports of the Select Committee report as
well as the debates in Parliament at the time of introduction of the amendment, or
the law as enacted. The appellants asserted that such debates are of limited
assistance only as external aids in the case of an ambiguity and had relied upon a
line of decisions starting with State of Travancore-Cochin v. Bombay Trading
Company (supra) and culminating in P.V. Narasimha Rao (supra). On the other
hand, the respondent States alluded to the larger bench decision of this Court in
Kalpana Mehta (supra) which emphatically held that Standing Committee reports
and statements made on the floor of House can be limited extrinsic aids for
considering and interpreting express terms of a statute, or even the Constitution.
107. In the present case, the Statement of Objects and Reasons do not throw
much light on why the provisions of the 102ndAmendment Act were introduced. No
doubt, there are certain passages in the Select Committee Report suggestive of the
fact that the power of identification carved out through the newly inserted Articles
338B and 342A would not in any manner disturb the powers of the State to carry
on their work in relation to special provisions or reservations for backward classes
(through appropriate measures, be it legislative or executive). A holistic reading of
the report also suggests that the Select Committee reflected both points of view and
recorded the assurances given by the Ministry that the State’s power would not be
disturbed. At the same time, in conclusion, it was emphatically stated that the
States’ concerns would be given due regard and that the exercise would be in line
with the existing procedure under Articles 341 and 342.99 The report also contains
notes of dissent, which highlight that the amendments would deprive the States of
their existing power to identify, and provide reservations and other special
provisions for the benefit of SEBCs.
99“57. The Ministry also clarified to the Committee that the phrase “for the purpose of this Constitution” as
provided under clause (1) of article 342A is on lines similar to articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution. The setting
up of the proposed Commission will not be retrograde to the interest of the socially and educationally backward
classes. The article 342A will provide for a comprehensive examination of each case of inclusion/exclusion from the
Central List. The ultimate power for such inclusion/exclusion would stand vested with the Parliament.”
108. There cannot be a disagreement with the proposition that where the
provisions of the statute or its wordings are ambiguous, the first attempt should be
to find meaning, through internal aids, in the statute itself. Failing this, it is open to
the court to find meaning, and resolve the ambiguity, by turning to external aids,
which include the statements of objects and reasons, as well as Parliamentary
reports, or debates in Parliament. To this Court, it appears that the task of
interpreting the provisions of 102ndAmendment does not begin by relying on
external aids such as Statement of Objects and Reasons (which throw practically
no light on the meaning of the provisions), or even the Select Committee Report.
The task of interpretation is first to consider the overall scheme of the provisions,
and secondly, after considering the provision, proceed to resolve any perceived
ambiguity, if found, by resorting to aids within the statute. It is at the third stage,
when such resolution is impossible, that external aids are to be looked into. Thus,
in a seven-judge bench decision, this court, in State of Karnataka v. Union of
India100administered the following caution, while outlining the court’s task of
“The dynamic needs of the nation, which a Constitution must fulfil,
leave no room for merely pedantic hair-splitting play with words or
semantic quibblings. This, however, does not mean that the Courts,
acting under the guise of a judicial power, which certainly extends to
even making the Constitution, in the sense that they may supplement it
in those parts of it where the letter of the Constitution is silent or may
leave room for its development by either ordinary legislation or
judicial interpretation, can actually nullify, defeat, or distort the
reasonably clear meaning of any part of the Constitution in order to
give expression to some theories of their own about the broad or basic
scheme of the Constitution. The theory behind the Constitution which
can be taken into account for purposes of interpretation, by going
even so far as to fill what have been called the "interstices" or spaces
left unfilled, due perhaps to some deliberate vagueness or
indefiniteness in the letter of the Constitution, must itself be gathered
from express provisions of the Constitution. The dubiousness of
expressions used may be cured by Court by making their meanings
clear and definite if necessary in the light of the broad and basic
purposes set before themselves by the Constitution makers. And, these
meanings may, in keeping with the objectives or ends which the
Constitution of every nation must serve, change with changing
requirements of the times. The power of judicial interpretation, even if
it includes what may be termed as "interstitial" law making, cannot
extend to direct conflict with express provisions of the Constitution or
to ruling them out of existence.”
109. The primary duty of this court, while interpreting a constitutional
provision(in the present case, an amendment to the Constitution, no less) was
underlined thus, in GVK Industries Ltd. v. Income Tax Officer101
“37. In interpreting any law, including the Constitution, the text of the
provision under consideration would be the primary source for
discerning the meanings that inhere in the enactment. However, in
light of the serious issues it would always be prudent, as a matter of
constitutional necessity, to widen the search for the true meaning,
purport and ambit of the provision under consideration. No provision,
and indeed no word or expression, of the Constitution exists in
isolation—they are necessarily related to, transforming and in turn
being transformed by, other provisions, words and phrases in the
38. Our Constitution is both long and also an intricate matrix of
meanings, purposes and structures. It is only by locating a particular
constitutional provision under consideration within that constitutional
matrix could one hope to be able to discern its true meaning, purport
and ambit. As Prof. Laurence Tribe points out:
“[T]o understand the Constitution as a legal text, it is essential to
recognize the … sort of text it is: a constitutive text that purports, in
the name of the people…, to bring into being a number of distinct but
inter-related institutions and practices, at once legal and political,
and to define the rules governing those institutions and practices.”
(See Reflections on Free-Form Method in Constitutional
39. It has been repeatedly appreciated by this Court that our
Constitution is one of the most carefully drafted ones, where every
situation conceivable, within the vast experience, expertise and
knowledge of our framers, was considered, deliberated upon, and
appropriate features and text chosen to enable the organs of the State
in discharging their roles. While indeed dynamic interpretation is
necessary, if the meaning necessary to fit the changed circumstances
could be found in the text itself, we would always be better served by
treading a path as close as possible to the text, by gathering the plain
ordinary meaning, and by sweeping our vision and comprehension
across the entire document to see whether that meaning is validated
by the constitutional values and scheme.”
In examining provisions of the Constitution, courts should adopt the primary rule,
and give effect to the plain meaning of the expressions; this rule can be departed,
only when there are ambiguities. In Kuldip Nayar v. Union of India 102 after
quoting from G. Narayanaswami v. G. Panneerselvam103 this court held that
“201. … We endorse and reiterate the view taken in the above quoted
paragraph of the judgment. It may be desirable to give a broad and
generous construction to the constitutional provisions, but while doing
so the rule of “plain meaning” or “literal” interpretation, which
remains “the primary rule”, has also to be kept in mind. In fact the
rule of “literal construction” is the safe rule unless the language used
is contradictory, ambiguous, or leads really to absurd results.”
110. Whilst dealing the task of the court, and the permissible extent to which it
can resort to internal and extrinsic aids to construction of a statute, this court
remarked, in Pushpa Devi v. Milkhi Ram104that:
“18. It is true when a word has been defined in the interpretation
clause, prima facie that definition governs wherever that word is used
in the body of the statute unless the context requires otherwise. “The
context”        as  pointed     out    in      the    book Cross-Statutory
Interpretation (2nd edn. p. 48) “is both internal and external”. The
internal context requires the interpreter to situate the disputed words
within the section of which they are part and in relation to the rest of
the Act. The external context involves determining the meaning from
ordinary linguistic usage (including any special technical meanings),
from the purpose for which the provision was passed, and from the
place of the provisions within the general scheme of statutory and
common law rules and principles.
19. The opening sentence in the definition of the section states “unless
there is anything repugnant in the subject or context”. In view of this
qualification, the court has not only to look at the words but also to
examine the context and collocation in the light of the object of the
Act and the purpose for which a particular provision was made by the
legislature.”
111.   Again, in Karnataka State Financial Corporation. v. N. Narasimahaiah105it
“42. Interpretation of a statute would not depend upon a contingency.
It has to be interpreted on its own. It is a trite law that the court would
ordinarily take recourse to the golden rule of literal interpretation. It
is not a case where we are dealing with a defect in the legislative
drafting. We cannot presume any. In a case where a court has to
weigh between a right of recovery and protection of a right, it would
also lean in favour of the person who is going to be deprived
therefrom. It would not be the other way round. Only because a
speedy remedy is provided for that would itself (sic not) lead to the
conclusion that the provisions of the Act have to be extended although
the statute does not say so. The object of the Act would be a relevant
factor for interpretation only when the language is not clear and when
two meanings are possible and not in a case where the plain language
leads to only one conclusion.”
112. In another recent decision, Laurel Energetics (P) Ltd. v. Securities Exchange
Board of India106 this court observed that:
“24. In Utkal Contractors and Joinery (P) Ltd. v. State of
Orissa [Utkal Contractors and Joinery (P) Ltd. v. State of Orissa,
1987 Supp SCC 751] , a similar argument was turned down in the
following terms: (SCC pp. 757-58, paras 11-12)
‘11. Secondly, the validity of the statutory notification cannot be
judged merely on the basis of Statement of Objects and Reasons
accompanying the Bill. Nor it could be tested by the government
policy taken from time to time. The executive policy of the
Government, or the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act or
Ordinance cannot control the actual words used in the legislation.
In Central      Bank     of    India v. Workmen [Central      Bank     of
India v. Workmen, AIR 1960 SC 12] S.K. Das, J. said: (AIR p. 21,
‘12. … The Statement of Objects and Reasons is not admissible,
however, for construing the section; far less can it control the actual
12. In State of W.B. v. Union of India [State of W.B. v. Union of India,
AIR 1963 SC 1241] , Sinha, C.J. observed: (AIR p. 1247, para 13)
‘13. … It is however, well settled that the Statement of Objects and
Reasons accompanying a Bill, when introduced in Parliament, cannot
be used to determine the true meaning and effect of substantive
provisions of the statute. They cannot be used except for the limited
purpose of understanding the background and the antecedent state of
affairs leading up to the legislation. But we cannot use this statement
as an aid to the construction of the enactment or to show that the
legislature did not intend to acquire the proprietary right vested in the
State or in any way to affect the State Governments' rights as owner of
minerals. A statute, as passed by Parliament, is the expression of the
collective intention of the legislature as a whole, and any statement
made by an individual, albeit a Minister, of the intention and objects
of the Act cannot be used to cut down the generality of the words used
in the statute.”
25. In the factual scenario before us, having regard to the aforesaid
judgment, it is not possible to construe the Regulation in the light of
its object, when the words used are clear. This statement of the law is
of course with the well-known caveat that the object of a provision
can certainly be used as an extrinsic aid to the interpretation of
statutes and subordinate legislation where there is ambiguity in the
words used.”
113. The position in UK is that that the report of a Select Committee may be
considered as background to the construction of an Act; however, such reports
could not be invested with any kind of interpretive authority. 107 In R. (Baiai) v.
Home Secretary,108a report of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights
was considered. The committee’s opinions on compatibility and other matters of
law were held to have persuasive value, however, they could have no greater
weight than, for example, the views of distinguished academic writers.109
IX       Interpretation of the Constitution, the definition clause under Article 366
and Amendments to the Constitution
114. The Court has to interpret provisions of the Constitution, in this case,
introduced through an amendment. The proper method of interpreting such an
amendment was indicated by a five-judge bench in Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu110,
“26. In expounding the processes of the fundamental law, the
Constitution must be treated as a logical whole. Westel Woodbury
Willoughby in The Constitutional Law of the United States (2nd edn.,
107See Ryanair Ltd. v. HM Revenue and Customs [2014] EWCA Civ. 410.
109Also see Craies on Statutory Interpretation, Eleventh Edition(Sweet & Maxwell) 2017 Chap. 27 @ para
“The Constitution is a logical whole, each provision of which is an
integral part thereof, and it is, therefore, logically proper, and indeed
imperative, to construe one part in the light of the provisions of the
other parts.”
“28. In considering the validity of a constitutional amendment the
changing and the changed circumstances that compelled the
amendment are important criteria. The observations of the U.S.
Supreme Court in Maxwell v. Dow [176 US 581 : 44 L Ed 597, 605
(1899)] are worthy of note: (L Ed p. 605)
“… to read its language in connection with the known condition of
affairs out of which the occasion for its adoption may have arisen,
and then to construe it, if there be therein any doubtful expressions, in
a way so far as is reasonably possible, to forward the known purpose
or object for which the amendment was adopted ….”
115. Recollecting these principles, this court is mindful of the first circumstance
that the 102ndAmendment brought in an entirely new dimension - an attempt to
identify backward classes, firstly by inserting Sub-Article (26C) into the definition
clause under Article 366. This insertion, in the opinion of the court, accords with
the statutory scheme of defining terms for the purposes of the Constitution. This
term “for the purposes of this Constitution” occurs twelve times111 in the
116. The interpretation of the definition in relation to the Constitution, is truly
indicative that for the purpose of the entire constitution, the meaning ascribed in
the definition clause – in this case, by Article 366 (26C), has to prevail. While
interpreting whether members of SCs/ STs who communities find mention in the
Presidential notification in two states, could claim reservation benefits in both
states, this court had occasion to consider a parimateria provision, i.e. Articles 366
(24) and (25) which defined SCs “for the purposes of this constitution”. In Marri
111Articles 108 (4); 299 (2); 341(1); 342 (1); 342A (1); 366 (14); 366 (24); 366 (25); 366 (26C) and 367 (3)
Chandra Shekhar Rao v. Dean, Seth G.S. Medical College 112, a Constitution Bench
“12. It is, however, necessary to give proper meaning to the
expressions ‘for the purposes of this Constitution’ and ‘in relation to
that State’ appearing in Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution.”
This court then noticed the divergent views of the High Courts and then
“13. It is trite knowledge that the statutory and constitutional
provisions should be interpreted broadly and harmoniously. It is trite
saying that where there is conflict between two provisions, these
should be so interpreted as to give effect to both. Nothing is surplus in
a Constitution and no part should be made nugatory. This is well
settled. See the observations of this Court in Venkataramana
Devaru v. State of Mysore [1958 SCR 895, 918 : AIR 1958 SC 255] ,
where Venkatarama Aiyer, J. reiterated that the rule of construction is
well settled and where there are in an enactment two provisions which
cannot be reconciled with each other, these should be so interpreted
that, if possible, effect could be given to both. It, however, appears to
us that the expression ‘for the purposes of this Constitution’ in Article
341 as well as in Article 342 do imply that the Scheduled Caste and
the Scheduled Tribes so specified would be entitled to enjoy all the
constitutional rights that are enjoyable by all the citizens as such.
Constitutional right, e.g., it has been argued that right to migration or
right to move from one part to another is a right given to all — to
Scheduled Castes or Tribes and to non-scheduled castes or tribes. But
when a Scheduled Caste or Tribe migrates, there is no inhibition in
migrating but when he migrates, he does not and cannot carry any
special rights or privileges attributed to him or granted to him in the
original State specified for that State or area or part thereof. If that
right is not given in the migrated State it does not interfere with his
constitutional right of equality or of migration or of carrying on his
trade, business or profession. Neither Article 14, 16, 19 nor Article 21
is denuded by migration but he must enjoy those rights in accordance
with the law if they are otherwise followed in the place where he
migrates. There should be harmonious construction, harmonious in
the sense that both parts or all parts of a constitutional provision
should be so read that one part does not become nugatory to the other
or denuded to the other but all parts must be read in the context in
which these are used. It was contended that the only way in which the
fundamental rights of the petitioner under Articles 14, 19(1)(d), 19(1)
(e) and 19(1)(f) could be given effect to is by construing Article 342 in
a manner by which a member of a Scheduled Tribe gets the benefit of
that status for the purposes of the Constitution throughout the
territory of India. It was submitted that the words “for the purposes of
this Constitution” must be given full effect. There is no dispute about
that. The words “for the purposes of this Constitution” must mean
that a Scheduled Caste so designated must have right under Articles
14, 19(1)(d), 19(1)(e) and 19(1)(f) inasmuch as these are applicable
to him in his area where he migrates or where he goes. The expression
“in relation to that State” would become nugatory if in all States the
special privileges or the rights granted to Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes are carried forward. It will also be inconsistent with
the whole purpose of the scheme of reservation. In Andhra Pradesh, a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe may require protection because
a boy or a child who grows in that area is inhibited or is at
disadvantage. In Maharashtra that caste or that tribe may not be so
inhibited but other castes or tribes might be. If a boy or a child goes
to that atmosphere of Maharashtra as a young boy or a child and
goes in a completely different atmosphere or Maharashtra where this
inhibition or this disadvantage is not there, then he cannot be said to
have that reservation which will denude the children or the people of
Maharashtra belonging to any segment of that State who may still
require that protection. After all, it has to be borne in mind that the
protection is necessary for the disadvantaged castes or tribes of
Maharashtra as well as disadvantaged castes or tribes of Andhra
Pradesh. Thus, balancing must be done as between those who need
protection and those who need no protection, i.e., who belong to
advantaged castes or tribes and who do not. Treating the
determination under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution to be
valid for all over the country would be in negation to the very purpose
and scheme and language of Article 341 read with Article 15(4) of the
14. Our attention was drawn to certain observations in Elizabeth
Warburton v. James Loveland [1832 HL 499] . It is true that all
provisions should be read harmoniously. It is also true that no
provision should be so read as to make other provisions nugatory or
restricted. But having regard to the purpose, it appears to us that
harmonious construction enjoins that we should give to each
expression —”in relation to that State” or “for the purposes of this
Constitution” — its full meaning and give their full effect. This must
be so construed that one must not negate the other. The construction
that reservation made in respect of the Scheduled Caste or Tribe of
that State is so determined to be entitled to all the privileges and
rights under the Constitution in that State would be the most correct
way of reading, consistent with the language, purpose and scheme of
the Constitution. Otherwise, one has to bear in mind that if
reservations to those who are treated as Scheduled Caste or Tribe in
Andhra Pradesh are also given to a boy or a girl who migrates and
gets deducted (sic inducted) in the State of Maharashtra or other
States where that caste or tribe is not treated as Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe then either reservation will have the effect of
depriving the percentage to the member of that caste or tribe in
Maharashtra who would be entitled to protection or it would denude
the other non-Scheduled Castes or non-Scheduled Tribes in
Maharashtra to the proportion that they are entitled to. This cannot
be logical or correct result designed by the Constitution.”
117. This Constitution Bench decision was followed in another decision, again by
five judges in Action      Committee      on     Issue   of    Caste   Certificate to
Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes in the State of Maharashtra           &Anr      v.
Union of India & Anr.113, when this court reiterated its previous view in Marri
(supra) and observed further as follows:
“16. We may add that considerations for specifying a particular caste
or tribe or class for inclusion in the list of Scheduled Castes/Schedule
Tribes or backward classes in a given State would depend on the
nature and extent of disadvantages and social hardships suffered by
that caste, tribe or class in that State which may be totally non est in
another State to which persons belonging thereto may migrate.
Coincidentally it may be that a caste or tribe bearing the same
nomenclature is specified in two States but the considerations on the
basis of which they have been specified may be totally different. So
also the degree of disadvantages of various elements which constitute
the input for specification may also be totally different. Therefore,
merely because a given caste is specified in State A as a Scheduled
Caste does not necessarily mean that if there be another caste bearing
the same nomenclature in another State the person belonging to the
former would be entitled to the rights, privileges and benefits
admissible to a member of the Scheduled Caste of the latter State “for
the purposes of this Constitution”. This is an aspect which has to be
kept in mind and which was very much in the minds of the
Constitution-makers as is evident from the choice of language of
Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution.”
118. The recent judgment in Bir Singh v. Delhi Jal Board (supra) reiterated the
previous two Constitution Bench judgments. It is useful to notice the partly
concurring judgment of Bhanumati, J. who observed that
“80. Clause (24) of Article 366 defines “Scheduled Castes” and
clause (25) of Article 366 defines “Scheduled Tribes”. The latter
“such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such
tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under Article 342 to be
“Scheduled Tribes” for the purposes of this Constitution”.
81. Article 341(1) of the Constitution empowers the President, in
consultation with the Governor of the State concerned, to specify
Scheduled Castes by public notification. Equally, Article 342(1) of the
Constitution empowers the President
“with respect to any State or Union Territory, and where it is a State,
after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification,
specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within
tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this
Constitution be deemed to be “Scheduled Tribes” in relation to that
State or Union Territory, as the case may be”.
Article 342(2) of the Constitution empowers
“Parliament, by law, to include in or exclude from the list of
“Scheduled Tribes” specified in a notification issued under clause (1),
any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or
tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the
said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.”
Until the Presidential Notification is modified by appropriate
amendment by Parliament in exercise of the power under Article
341(2) of the Constitution, the Presidential Notification issued under
Article 341(1) is final and conclusive and any caste or group cannot
be added to it or subtracted by any action either by the State
Government or by a court on adducing of evidence. In other words, it
is the constitutional mandate that the tribes or tribal communities or
parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities specified
by the President, after consultation with the Governor in the public
notification, will be “Scheduled Tribes” subject to the law made by
Parliament alone, which may, by law, include in or exclude from the
list of “Scheduled Tribes” specified by the President. Thereafter, it
cannot be varied except by law made by Parliament.
82. The President of India alone is competent or authorised to issue
an appropriate notification in terms of Articles 341(1) and 342(1).
Cumulative reading of Articles 338, 341 and 342 indicate that:
(a) Only the President could notify castes/tribes as Scheduled
Castes/Tribes and also indicate conditions attaching to such
declaration. A public notification by the President specifying the
particular castes or tribes as SC/ST shall be final for the purpose of
Constitution and shall be exhaustive.
(b) Once a notification is issued under clause (1) of Articles 341 and
342 of the Constitution, Parliament can by law include in or exclude
from the list of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, specified in the
notification, any caste or tribe but save for that limited purpose the
notification issued under clause (1), shall not be varied by any
subsequent notification [ Ref. Action Committee on Issue of Caste
Certificate to SCs/STs in State of Maharashtra v. Union of India,
119.   These three Constitution Bench judgments, Marri (supra), Action
Committee (supra) and Bir Singh (supra) therefore, have set the tone as it were, for
the manner in which determination by the President is to be interpreted, having
regard to the definition clause in Article 366, which has to apply for interpreting
the particular expression in a consistent manner, for the purpose of the
Constitution. Thus, the expression SCs in relation to a State for the “purpose of
this Constitution”, means the member of a SC declared to be so under the
Presidential Notification. The terms of such Presidential Notification insist that
such a citizen ought to be a resident of that concerned State or Union Territory.
This aspect is of some importance, given that there are a large number of
communities which are common in several States. However, the decisions of this
Court are uniform since Marri (supra) stated that it is only the citizens residing in a
particular state who can claim the benefit of reservation – either of that State or of
the Centre for the purposes of the Constitution in relation to that State. Necessarily,
therefore, the resident of State A is entitled to claim reservation benefits under
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) if he or she resides (the residential qualification that needs
to be fulfilled is that specified by the concerned State) in that State, (i.e. A) and
none else. As a sequitur, if such a person or community or caste (of state A) is also
described as a Scheduled Caste in State B, for the purposes of State services or
admission to State institutions, he cannot claim the benefits of reservation as a
scheduled caste in such B State. However, Bir Singh (supra) has made it clear that
for the purposes of Union employment and admissions to Union institutions the
position is different because SCs living within the territory of India in relation to
one State or the other, are deemed to be SCs or STs for the purposes of this
Constitution in relation for the purposes of Union employment.
120. The interpretation of Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution, read with
Articles 366 (24) and 366 (25), have to, in our opinion, be the guiding factors in
interpreting Article 366 (26C), which follows a similar pattern, i.e. of defining, for
the purpose of the entire constitution, with reference to the determination of those
communities who are notified as SEBCs, under Article 342A (which again uses the
expression “for the purpose of this constitution”).
121. Quite similarly, when Article 366 was amended by the Forty Sixth
amendment Act, and Article 366(29A) was introduced to Article 366, this Court
considered the previous amendments, which are the 6 thAmendment to the
Constitution and the 46thAmendment which amended Article 269 and Article 286,
besides introducing Entry 92A to the Union List. The Court went on to hold in a
five-judge bench decision in 20th Century Finance Corpn. Ltd. v. State of
Maharashtra114, that the interpretation adopted by this Court led to the inexorable
conclusion that a limitation was placed upon the States’ power of taxation. Article
366(29A) on the one hand, expanded the specie of sale which could be the
legitimate subject of taxation by the State, but at the same time, on the other hand,
the amendment also introduced limitations upon the State power which was
subjected to controls by Parliament. Therefore, in the context of the amendment the
expression“sale” underwent alteration, partly allowing and partly restricting states’
power to tax goods. This court, after recounting the history of the previous
“19. Following the decisions referred to above, we are of the view
that the power of State Legislatures to enact law to levy tax on the
transfer of right to use any goods under Entry 54 of List II of the
Seventh Schedule has two limitations — one arising out of the entry
itself; which is subject to Entry 92-A of List I, and the other flowing
from the restrictions embodied in Article 286. By virtue of Entry 92-A
of List I, Parliament has power to legislate in regard to taxes on sales
or purchase of goods other than newspapers where such sale or
purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
Article 269 provides for levy and collection of such taxes. Because of
these restrictions, State Legislatures are not competent to enact law
imposing tax on the transactions of transfer of right to use any goods
which take place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
Further, by virtue of clause (1) of Article 286, the State Legislature is
precluded from making law imposing tax on the transactions of
transfer of right to use any goods where such deemed sales take place
(a) outside the State; and (b) in the course of import of goods into the
territory of India. Yet, there are other limitations on the taxing power
of the State Legislature by virtue of clause (3) of Article 286. Although
Parliament has enacted law under clause (3)(a) of Article 286 but no
law so far has been enacted by Parliament under clause (3)(b) of
Article 286. When such law is enacted by Parliament, the State
Legislature would be required to exercise its legislative power in
conformity with such law. Thus, what we have stated above, are the
limitations on the powers of State Legislatures on levy of sales tax on
deemed sales envisaged under sub-clause (d) of clause (29-A) of
Article 366 of the Constitution.”
122. In a similar manner, the expression, “unless the context otherwise
provides”[which is the controlling expression in Article 366(1)] was interpreted by
an earlier Constitution Bench in Builders’ Association of India v. Union of
India115when the amendment to Article 366 was considered:
“32. Before proceeding further, it is necessary to understand what
sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A) of Article 366 of the Constitution
means. Article 366 is the definition clause of the Constitution. It says
that in the Constitution unless the context otherwise requires, the
expressions defined in that article have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in that article. The expression ‘goods’ is defined in
clause (12) of Article 366 of the Constitution as including all
materials, commodities and articles.”
After discussing the previous decisions in respect of the unamended provisions, the
“The emphasis is on the transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in
some other form). The latter part of clause (29-A) of Article 366 of the
Constitution makes the position very clear. While referring to the transfer, delivery
or supply of any goods that takes place as per sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (29-
A), the latter part of clause (29-A) says that “such transfer, delivery or supply of
any goods” shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the
transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase of those goods by the person to whom
such transfer, delivery or supply is made. Hence, a transfer of property in goods
under sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A) is deemed to be a sale of the goods involved
in the execution of a works contract by the person making the transfer and a
purchase of those goods by the person to whom such transfer is made. The object
of the new definition introduced in clause (29-A) of Article 366 of the Constitution
is, therefore, to enlarge the scope of ‘tax on sale or purchase of goods’ wherever it
occurs in the Constitution so that it may include within its scope the transfer,
delivery or supply of goods that may take place under any of the transactions
referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (f) thereof wherever such transfer, delivery or
supply becomes subject to levy of sales tax. So construed the expression ‘tax on
the sale or purchase of goods’ in Entry 54 of the State List, therefore, includes a
tax on the transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form)
involved in the execution of a works contract also. The tax leviable by virtue of
sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A) of Article 366 of the Constitution thus becomes
subject to the same discipline to which any levy under entry 54 of the State List is
made subject to under the Constitution. The position is the same when we look at
Article 286 of the Constitution. Clause (1) of Article 286 says that no law of a
State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of
goods where such sale or purchase takes place — (a) outside the State; or (b) in
the course of the import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the
territory of India. Here again we have to read the expression “a tax on the sale or
purchase of goods” found in Article 286 as including the transfer of goods
referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A) of Article 366 which is deemed to be
a sale of goods and the tax leviable thereon would be subject to the terms of
clause (1) of Article 286. Similarly the restrictions mentioned in clause (2) of
Article 286 of the Constitution which says that Parliament may by law formulate
principles for determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in any of
the ways mentioned in clause (1) of Article 286 would also be attracted to a
transfer of goods contemplated under Article 366(29-A)(b). Similarly clause (3) of
Article 286 is also applicable to a tax on a transfer of property referred to in sub-
clause (b) of clause (29-A) of Article 366. Clause (3) of Article 286 consists of two
parts. Sub-clause (a) of clause (3) of Article 286 deals with a tax on the sale or
purchase of goods declared by Parliament by law to be of special importance in
inter-State trade or commerce, which is generally applicable to all sales including
the transfer, supply or delivery of goods which are deemed to be sales under
clause (29-A) of Article 366 of the Constitution. If any declared goods which are
referred to in Section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 are involved in such
transfer, supply or delivery, which is referred to in clause (29-A) of Article 366,
the sales tax law of a State which provides for levy of sales tax thereon will have
to comply with the restrictions mentioned in Section 15 of the Central Sales Tax
…. We are of the view that all transfers, deliveries and supplies of goods referred
to in clauses (a) to (f) of clause (29-A) of Article 366 of the Constitution are
subject to the restrictions and conditions mentioned in clause (1), clause (2) and
sub-clause (a) of clause (3) of Article 286 of the Constitution and the transfers
and deliveries that take place under sub-clauses (b), (c) and (d) of clause (29-A)
of Article 366 of the Constitution are subject to an additional restriction
mentioned in sub-clause (b) of Article 286(3) of the Constitution.”
123. In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Willamson Financial Services 116,this court
had to interpret “agricultural income”, a term defined in Article 366(1) as follows:
“366. Definitions.—In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following expressions have the meanings hereby
respectively assigned to them, that is to say—
(1) ‘agricultural income’ means agricultural income as defined for the
purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income tax;”
124. Noticing that the definition (Article 366 (1) (1)) itself referred to the term as
defined by the Income tax Act, and after considering the definition in the existing
“30. The expression “agricultural income”, for the purpose of
abovementioned entries, means agricultural income as defined for the
purpose of the enactments relating to Indian income tax vide Article
366(1) of the Constitution. Therefore, the definition of “agricultural
income” in Article 366(1) indicates that it is open to the income tax
enactments in force from time to time to define “agricultural income”
in any particular manner and that would be the meaning not only for
tax enactments but also for the Constitution. This mechanism has been
devised to avoid a conflict with the legislative power of States in
respect of agricultural income.”
125. Another important decision is Tata Consultancy Services v. State of
A.P.117The issue involved was interpretation of the expression in Article 366(12),
i.e. “goods” which reads as follows:
“(12) “goods” includes all materials, commodities, and articles”.
126. This court expansively interpreted the definition and held that the it includes
software programmes, observing that the term “goods” included intangible
“27. In our view, the term “goods” as used in Article 366(12) of the
Constitution and as defined under the said Act is very wide and
includes all types of movable properties, whether those properties be
tangible or intangible. We are in complete agreement with the
observations made by this Court in Associated Cement Companies
Ltd. [(2001) 4 SCC 593] A software program may consist of various
commands which enable the computer to perform a designated task.
The copyright in that program may remain with the originator of the
program. But the moment copies are made and marketed, it becomes
goods, which are susceptible to sales tax. Even intellectual property,
once it is put on to a media, whether it be in the form of books or
canvas (in case of painting) or computer discs or cassettes, and
marketed would become “goods”. …… The term “all materials,
articles and commodities” includes both tangible and
intangible/incorporeal property which is capable of abstraction,
consumption and use and which can be transmitted, transferred,
delivered, stored, possessed, etc. The software programs have all
these attributes.”
127.    It is therefore, apparent that whenever the definition clause, i.e. Article 366
has arisen for interpretation, this court has consistently given effect to the express
terms, and in the broadest manner. Whenever new definitions were introduced, full
effect was given, to the plain and grammatical terms, often, limiting existing
legislative powers conferred upon the states.
128. Before proceeding to examine whether the term “the Central List” in Article
342A indicates an expression to the contrary, [per Article 366 (1)] it is also
necessary to consider some decisions that have interpreted amendments which
introduced entirely new provisions, either affecting state’s legislative powers, or
limiting fundamental rights.
129. In Bimolangshu Roy v. State of Assam118 the state’s legislative competence to
enact a law providing for appointment of Parliamentary Secretaries, in the context
of provisions of the Constitution (Ninety-First Amendment) Bill, 2003 which was
passed by both the Houses of Parliament and after receiving the assent of the
President, became a provision of the Constitution. It introduced Article 164(1-A),
which had the effect of limiting the total number of Ministers in the Council of
Ministers in a State, including the Chief Minister, to fifteen per cent of the total
number of members of the Legislative Assembly of that State; the minimum
number of ministers was to be 12. The state assembly sought to create offices that
had the effect of exceeding the number mandated (15%). Upon a challenge, it was
argued that the state had legislative competence to enact the law, by virtue of
Article 194. That argument was repelled by this court, which held:
“36. As rightly pointed out by the petitioners, the existence of a
dedicated article in the Constitution authorising the making of law on
a particular topic would certainly eliminate the possibility of the
existence of the legislative authority to legislate in Article 246 read
with any entry in the Seventh Schedule indicating a field of legislation
which appears to be closely associated with the topic dealt with by the
dedicated article. For example, even if the Constitution were not to
contain Entries 38, 39, 40 in List II the State Legislatures would still
be competent to make laws w.r.t. the topics indicated in those three
entries, because of the authority contained in Articles 164(5), 186,
194, 195, etc. Therefore, to place a construction on those entries
which would have the effect of enabling the legislative body
concerned to make a law not within the contemplation of the said
articles would be plainly repugnant to the scheme of the
“39. The distinction between the scheme of Article 262 Entry 56 of
List I and Entry 17 of List II and the scheme of Article 194 and Entry
39 of List II is this that in the case of inter-State water disputes
neither of the abovementioned two entries make any mention of the
adjudication of water disputes and only Article 262 deals with the
topic. In the case on hand, the relevant portion of the text of Article
194(3) and Entry 39 of List II are almost identical and speak about
the “powers, privileges and immunities” of the House, its Members
and committees.
40. The question therefore is — Whether the text of Article 194(3) and
Entry 39 is wide enough to authorise the legislature to make the Act?
41. In view of the fact that the text of both Article 194(3) and the
relevant portion of Entry 39 are substantially similar, the meaning of
the clause “the powers, privileges and the immunities of a House of
the legislature of a State … and of the Members of a House of such
legislature” must be examined.”
“43. Article 194 deals exclusively with the powers and privileges of
the legislature, its Members and committees thereof. While clause (1)
declares that there shall be freedom of speech in the legislature
subject to the limitations enumerated therein, clause (2) provides
immunity in favour of the Members of the legislature from any legal
proceedings in any court for anything said or any vote given by such
Members in the legislature or any committees, etc. Clause (3) deals
with the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the
Legislature and its Members with respect to matters other than the
ones covered under clauses (1) and (2).
44. Thus, it can be seen from the scheme of Article 194 that it does not
expressly authorise the State Legislature to create offices such as the
one in question. On the other hand, Article 178 speaks about the
offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Article 179 deals with the
vacation of those offices or resignations of incumbents of those offices
whereas Articles 182 and 183 deal with the Chairman and Deputy
Chairman of the Legislative Council wherever the Council exists. In
our opinion, the most crucial article in this Chapter is Article 187
which makes stipulations even with reference to the secretarial staff of
the legislature. On the face of such elaborate and explicit
constitutional arrangement with respect to the legislature and the
various offices connected with the legislature and matters incidental
to them to read the authority to create new offices by legislation
would be a wholly irrational way of construing the scope of Article
194(3) and Entry 39 of List II. Such a construction would be enabling
the legislature to make a law which has no rational connection with
the subject-matter of the entry. “The powers, privileges and
immunities” contemplated by Article 194(3) and Entry 39 are those of
the legislators qua legislators.”
130. In Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union of India 119 the issue which arose for
consideration was the correct interpretation of Article 15(5)(extracted below in a
footnote)120, introduced by virtue of the Constitution (Ninety Third Amendment)
Act, 2005. It enabled the state to make special provisions for the advancement of
any SEBCs or for SCs or STs as far as they related to “their admission to
educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided
or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to
in clause (1) of article 30”. This court held that on a true construction, special
provisions for admission to such category of candidates, even in private
educational institutions, was permissible. The court inter alia, held that:
“125. Both Articles 15(4) and 15(5) are enabling provisions. Article
15(4) was introduced when the “Communal G.O.” in the State of
Madras was struck down by this Court in Champakam Dorairajan
case [1951 SCR 525] . In Unni Krishnan [(1993) 1 SCC 645] this
Court held that Article 19(1)(g) is not attracted for establishing and
running educational institutions. However, in T.M.A. Pai Foundation
case [(2002) 8 SCC 481] it was held that the right to establish and
run educational institutions is an occupation within the meaning of
Article 19(1)(g). The scope of the decision in T.M.A. Pai Foundation
case [(2002) 8 SCC 481] was later explained in P.A. Inamdar
case [(2005) 6 SCC 537] . It was held that as regards unaided
institutions, the State has no control and such institutions are free to
admit students of their own choice. The said decision necessitated the
enactment of the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005.
Thus, both Articles 15(4) and 15(5) operate in different areas. The
120[(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from making
any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or
for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to
educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.]
“nothing in this article” [mentioned at the beginning of Article 15(5)]
would only mean that the nothing in this article which prohibits the
State on grounds which are mentioned in Article 15(1) alone be given
importance. Article 15(5) does not exclude Article 15(4) of the
126. It is a well-settled principle of constitutional interpretation that
while interpreting the provisions of the Constitution, effect shall be
given to all the provisions of the Constitution and no provision shall
be interpreted in a manner as to make any other provision in the
Constitution inoperative or otiose. If the intention of Parliament was
to exclude Article 15(4), they could have very well deleted Article
15(4) of the Constitution. Minority institutions are also entitled to the
exercise of fundamental rights under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution, whether they be aided or unaided. But in the case of
Article 15(5), the minority educational institutions, whether aided or
unaided, are excluded from the purview of Article 15(5) of the
Constitution. Both, being enabling provisions, would operate in their
own field and the validity of any legislation made on the basis of
Article 15(4) or 15(5) has to be examined on the basis of provisions
contained in such legislation or the special provision that may be
made under Article 15(4) or 15(5)….”
131. The Court, similarly, gave full effect to the definition clause in Article 366
[in the definition of Union territory, under Article 366(30)]while examining the
soundness of the argument that immunity from intergovernmental taxation (i.e.,
under Article 289 which exempts states from Union taxation), extends to Union
Territories and municipalities. It was argued that in many cases, the Union
Territories had Legislative Assemblies, by statutory enactments, or special
provisions, and in the case of municipalities, the Constitution had, through
amendment, and introduction of Article 243X, authorized states to authorize
municipal levies. The court repelled this argument, in New Delhi Municipal
Council v. State of Punjab121in a nine-judge ruling, stating as follows:
121(1997) 7 SCC 339 at page 370.
“53. Before dealing with the specific circumstances of, and the
decision in, each of these cases, it is necessary that a few provisions
which figure prominently be dealt with. Article 246(4) of the
Constitution, as it stood on 26-1-1950, allowed Parliament to “make
laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India
not included in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule”. The Seventh
Amendment Act brought about a number of changes affecting Union
Territories, some of which have already been noticed by us. The other
changes brought about by it are also relevant; it caused Article 246 to
be changed to its present form where Parliament is empowered to
make laws with respect to “any part of the territory of India not
included in a State”. The word “State” has not been defined in the
Constitution. Article 1(3) defines the territory of India as comprising:
(a) the territories of the States; (b) the Union Territories specified in
the First Schedule; and (c) such other territories as may be acquired.
The word “Union Territory” has been defined in Article 366(30) to
mean “any Union Territory specified in the First Schedule and
includes any other territory comprised within the territory of India but
54. Though not defined in the Constitution, the word “State” has been
defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (hereinafter called “the
General Clauses Act”). Article 367 of the Constitution states that the
General Clauses Act, 1897 shall, unless the context otherwise requires
and subject to any adaptations and modifications made under Article
372, apply for the interpretation of the Constitution. Therefore, on a
plain reading of the provisions involved, it would appear that the
definition of “State” in the General Clauses Act would be applicable
for the purposes of interpreting the Constitution. Article 372 is the
saving clause of the Constitution which enables all laws in force
before the commencement of the Constitution to continue in the
territory of India. Article 372-A, which, once again, owes its origin to
the Seventh Amendment Act, empowers the President to make further
adaptations in particular situations.
“99. It is, therefore, clear that even under the new scheme,
Municipalities do not have an independent power to levy taxes.
Although they can now be granted more substantial powers than ever
before, they continue to be dependent upon their parent legislatures
for the bestowal of such privileges. In the case of Municipalities
within States, they have to be specifically delegated the power to tax
by the State Legislature concerned. In Union Territories which do not
have Legislative Assemblies of their own, such a power would have to
be delegated by Parliament. Of the rest, those which have Legislative
Assemblies of their own would have to specifically empower
Municipalities within them with the power to levy taxes.
100. We have already held that despite the fact that certain Union
Territories have Legislative Assemblies of their own, they are very
much under the supervision of the Union Government and cannot be
said to have an independent status. Under our constitutional scheme,
all taxation must fall within either of two categories: State taxation or
Union taxation. Since it is axiomatic that taxes levied by authorities
within a State would amount to State taxation, it would appear that
the words “or by any authority within a State” have been added in
Article 285(1) by way of abundant caution. It could also be that these
words owe their presence in the provision to historical reasons; it may
be noted that Section 154 of the 1935 Act was similarly worded. The
fact that Article 289(1), which in its phraseology is different from
Section 155 of the 1935 Act having been drafted by the Drafting
Committee to meet specific objections, does not contain words similar
to those in Article 285(1), will not in any way further the case of the
appellant, because the phrase “Union taxation” will encompass
municipal taxes levied by Municipalities in Union Territories.”
It is noteworthy that the court was inter alia, guided by the definition of “State” in
Article 367 of the Constitution of India.
X. Interpreting provisions of the 102 nd Amendment- Article 366 (26C), 338B and
132. What is noticeable in the lines of decisions preceding this section, including
those dealing with constitutional amendments- is that whenever the definition
clause (Article 366) arose for consideration, the court gave full effect to the
substantive amendments as well as the definition (as in the case of Builders
Association [supra] and Twentieth Century Leasing [supra]), as well as the newly
introduced provisions (as in the case of Bimolangshu Roy [supra] and Ashoka
Municipal Council (supra), this court gave full effect to the plain meaning of the
definition clause, in Article 366 (1) (1) and (30) respectively.
133. In this background, the crucial point to be decided is - did Parliament, acting
in its constituent capacity, whereby any amendment needed a special majority of
two thirds of its members present and voting, in both the Houses separately, wish
to bring about a change in status quo or not?
134. Parliament was aware that the procedure for identification of SCs and STs,
culminated with the final decision by the President on the aid and advice of the
Union Council of Ministers. This position in law underwent little change, despite
the Constitution (Sixty Fifth) and Constitution (Eighty Ninth)Amendment Acts,
which set up commissions for SCs and STs, replacing the provisions of the original
constitution which had created an authority called the “Special Officer”. Through
the amended Articles 338 and 338A, consultation with the states in the matter of
inclusion or exclusion, was and continues to be given due consideration. It is also
possible for states to initiate the process and propose the inclusion (or deletion of)
new communities or castes, by sending their proposals, duly supported by relevant
material, for consideration. This constitutional procedure, so to say, culminating in
the final word of Parliament was well known, in relation to SCs and STs. The
states were, and are, bound to consult these two commissions, for SCs and STs
(under Articles 338 and 338A).Till the 102 nd Amendment, when it came to
backward classes, or SEBCs, the Constitution was silent- definitionally, as well as
the manner by which their identification could take place.
135. The interpretive exercise carried out in Indra Sawhney saw this court
enjoining the Central and State governments to set up some permanent
mechanisms in the form of commissions, to identify SEBCs through a systematic
and scientific manner and carry on regular periodic reviews. The respondent states
emphasize that pursuant to this direction, state enactments were framed and
brought into force. The arguments on their behalf as well as the Attorney General
was that given these directions by a nine-judge bench, it could not be inferred that
the 102nd Amendment was ever intended to bring about such a drastic change as to
exclude the state’s role altogether, in the task of making special provisions under
Article 15 (4) and Article 16 (4), in regard to identification of SEBCs.
136. It is correct that Indra Sawhney clearly voiced the need for the Central
Government and the states to take measures for setting up permanent commissions
or bodies, if need be through legislation, to carry out the task of identification of
communities as SEBCs for the purposes of Articles 15 and 16. However, that
articulation or even direction, could not have, in the opinion of this court, been an
injunction never to depart from the existing mechanisms of setting standards for
identification of such classes, nor was it to be a direction in perpetuity, that status
quo remain forever. It cannot be seriously assumed that if Parliament were so
minded, it cannot bring about changes at all to the Constitution, in regard to how
identification of backward classes is to take place. The existence of the provision in
Article 368, enabling amendments, and the inapplicability of the proviso to Article
368(2) in relation to the kind of changes to the Constitution, brought about by
introduction of Articles 366 (26C), Article 338B and Article 342A, negates this
argument.
137. A reading of the Select Committee’s Report (in relation to the 102 nd
Amendment) bears out that various changes to the proposed amendments were
suggested on the ground that on a fair and reasonable interpretation of its terms,
State’s powers to make reservations could be impacted. The Central Government’s
representatives and officials assured that the State’s role in the process of backward
class identification and listing, would be maintained. None of the amendments
proposed, expressly preserving the state power, were accepted. The dissenting
members were aware that a fair and reasonable interpretation of the terms of the
amendment clearly ousted the State’s powers to identify backward classes of
citizens. This emerges on a reading of a note by Shri Sukhendu Shekhar Roy, a
Member of Parliament who relied on extracts of the judgment in Indra Sawhney
and observed that the amendments prescribed “for the unitary authority which in
effect shall encroach upon the jurisdiction of the States in the matter of identifying
and specifying the socially and educationally backward classes”. Three Members,
Shri Digvijaya Singh, Shri B.K. Hariprasad, and Shri Hussain Dalwai, submitted a
joint note of dissent which dealt with the powers of the commission under Article
342A, and also suggested changes in its composition. Shri Sharad Yadav, another
Member of Parliament, was of the view that there was no need of any inclusion or
exclusion of the castes and approval thereof should not be left to the Governor,
Parliament and President as it will be a step backward. Dr.Dalip Kumar Tirkey,
Member of the Rajya Sabha, proposed sub-articles (3) and (4) to Article 342A,
enabling the State to publish a list which could be modified by State Assemblies.
Ms. Kanimozhi in her long letter of dissent, also highlighted the effect of a
proposed amendment and insertion of Article 342A which had the effect of ousting
the states’ power, which they had hitherto exercised to identify SEBCs.
138. The debates in Parliament also witnessed members voicing apprehensions
that the power hitherto enjoyed by the states, would be whittled down drastically.
These fears were allayed by the concerned Minister who piloted the Bill before
both Houses of Parliament. Extracts of these statements have been set out in
extenso in the judgment of Ashok Bhushan, J.; they are not reproduced here, for the
sake of brevity.
139. These materials show that there was on the one hand, an assumption that the
changes ushered by the amendments would not disturb any part of states’ powers;
however, a sizeable number- 8 members, after a careful reading of the terms of the
amendment, dissented, saying that state power would be adversely impacted. In
these circumstances, the debate which ensued at the time of passing of the Bill into
the 102nd Amendment was by way of an assurance by the Minister concerned that
the existing power of the states would not be affected. To the same effect, are
debates on the floor of the Houses of Parliament. Given all these circumstances, it
is difficult to accept the contention that the Select Committee’s Report, to the
extent it holds out an assurance, should be used as a determinative external aid for
interpretation of the actual terms of the 102nd Amendment. Likewise, debates and
statements cannot be conclusive about the terms of the changes brought about by
an amendment to the Constitution. The duty of the court always is to first interpret
the text, and only if there is ambiguity in the meaning, to resort first to internal
aids, before seeking external aids outside the text.
140. It would be useful to recollect that this Court had, through a seven-judge
bench, held that the words of the statute are to be construed on their own terms and
that the task of interpretation should not be determined by statements made by
Ministers and Members of Parliament. In Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing (supra) it
“No one may speak for the Parliament and Parliament is never before
the Court. After Parliament has said what it intends to say, only the
Court may say what the Parliament meant to say. None else. Once a
statute leaves Parliament House, the Court's is the only authentic
voice which may echo (interpret) the Parliament. This the court will
do with reference to the language of the statute and other permissible
aids.”
141. This aspect was highlighted somewhat more vividly in a recent decision of
this Court in Shivraj Singh Chauhan v. Speaker, Madhya Pradesh Legislative
Assembly122, where it was held that:
“In interpreting the Constitution, it would be not be correct to rely on
the speeches Constituent Assembly of India, Volume VIII (debate of 1
June 1949) made by individual members of the Constituent Assembly.
Each speech represents the view of one individual in the Assembly
which taken as a whole formed a kaleidoscope of competing political
ideologies. There may arise instances where the court is of the
independent opinion that the views raised by individual Members of
the Constituent Assembly in their speeches lay down considerations
that warrant examination and approval by the Court. The general rule
however, would be to examine the decisions taken by Constituent
Assembly taken by majority vote. The votes of the Constituent
Assembly represent equally the views of all the members of the
Assembly and are the final and dispositive expressions of the
constitutional choices taken in framing our Constitution.”
142. The use of external aids such as speeches and parliamentary reports was
commented upon earlier, rather strongly, by Sabyasachi Mukherjee, CJ in the
decision reported as DTC Mazdoor Congress v. Delhi Transport Corporation:123
“Construction or interpretation of legislative or rule provisions
proceeds on the assumption that courts must seek to discover and
translate the intention of the legislature or the rule-making body. This
is one of the legal fictions upon the hypothesis of which the framework
of adjudication of the intention of a piece of legislation or rule
proceeds. But these are fictional myths to a large extent as experience
should tell us. In most of the cases legislature, that is to say, vast
majority of the people who are supposed to represent the views and
opinions of the people, do not have any intention, even if they have,
they cannot and do not articulate those intentions. On most of these
issues their is no comprehension or understanding. Reality would
reveal that it is only those who are able to exert their view- points, in
a common parliamentary jargon, the power lobby, gets what it wants,
and the machinery is of a bureaucratic set up who draft the legislation
or rule or law. So, there- fore, what is passed on very often as the will
of the people in a particular enactment is the handy work of a
bureaucratic machine produced at the behest of a power lobby
control- ling the corridors of power in a particular situation. This
takes the mythical shape of the 'intention of the people' in the form of
legislation. Again, very often, the bureaucratic machine is not able to
correctly and properly transmute what was intended to be conveyed.
In such a situation, is it or is it not better, one would ponder to ask,
whether the courts should attribute to the law-making body the
knowledge of the values and limitations of the Constitution, and
knowledge of the evils that should be remedied at a particular time
and in a situation that should be met by a particular piece of
legislation, and the court with the experience and knowledge of law,
with the assistance of lawyers trained in this behalf, should endeavour
to find out what will be the correct and appropriate solution, and
construe the rule of the legislation within the ambit of constitutional
limitations and upon reasonable judgment of what should have been
expressed. In reality, that happens in most of the cases. Can it be
condemned as judicial usurpation of law-making functions of the
legislature thereby depriving the people of their right to express their
will? This is a practical dilemma which Judges must always, in cases
of interpretation and construction, face and a question which they
must answer.”
143. The polyvocality of parliamentary proceedings where the views expressed
by Ministers or Parliamentarians may not be common or unanimous and the danger
of attributing a particular intention to the terms of a statute, through the words of a
Minister or other functionary which may be at odds with the plain words, cannot be
lost sight of.
144. In the decision reported as BBC Enterprises v.Hi-Tech Xtravision Ltd.,124 the
court cautioned against the use of the purposive interpretation rule, saying that
“the courts should now be very reluctant to hold that Parliament has
achieved nothing by the language it used, when it is tolerably plain
what Parliament wished to achieve.”
145. This caution was accepted in Balram Kumawat v. Union of India 125 where it
“26. The courts will therefore reject that construction which will
defeat the plain intention of the legislature even though there may be
some           inexactitude      in       the       language         used.
[See Salmon v. Duncombe [Salmon v. Duncombe, (1886) LR 11 AC
627 (PC)] (AC at p. 634).] Reducing the legislation futility shall be
avoided and in a case where the intention of the legislature cannot be
given effect to, the courts would accept the bolder construction for the
purpose of bringing about an effective result. The courts, when rule of
purposive construction is gaining momentum, should be very reluctant
to hold that Parliament has achieved nothing by the language it used
when it is tolerably plain what it seeks to achieve. [See B.B.C.
Enterprises Ltd. v. Hi-Tech Xtravision Ltd. [B.B.C. Enterprises
Ltd. v. Hi-Tech Xtravision Ltd., (1990) 2 All ER 118 : 1990 Ch 609 :
(1990) 2 WLR 1123 (CA)] (All ER at pp. 122-23).]”
146. Taking into consideration the amendment to Section 123 of the
Representation of People’s Act, which introduced a new corrupt practice, i.e. the
candidate making an appeal on the basis of his religion or caste, this court took the
aid of the doctrine of purposive construction, in Abhiram Singh v. C.D.
Commachen126. The majority judgment adopted a wide interpretation, whereby any
appeal on proscribed grounds, by the candidate, for himself, against his rival, or to
the voter, would constitute a corrupt practice:
“47. There is no doubt in our mind that keeping in view the social
context in which clause (3) of Section 123 of the Act was enacted and
today's social and technological context, it is absolutely necessary to
give a purposive interpretation to the provision rather than a literal or
strict interpretation as suggested by the learned counsel for the
appellants, which, as he suggested, should be limited only to the
candidate's religion or that of his rival candidates. To the extent that
this Court has limited the scope of Section 123(3) of the Act in Jagdev
Singh Sidhanti [Jagdev Singh Sidhanti v. Pratap Singh Daulta, (1964)
Yagnik [Kanti       Prasad     Jayshanker      Yagnik v. Purshottamdas
Ranchhoddas Patel, (1969) 1 SCC 455] and Ramesh Yeshwant
Prabhoo [Ramesh Yeshwant Prabhoo v. Prabhakar Kashinath Kunte,
(1996) 1 SCC 130 : (1995) 7 Scale 1] to an appeal based on the
religion of the candidate or the rival candidate(s), we are not in
agreement with the view expressed in these decisions. We have
nothing to say with regard to an appeal concerning the conservation
of language dealt with in Jagdev Singh Sidhanti [Jagdev Singh
Sidhanti v. Pratap Singh Daulta, (1964) 6 SCR 750 : AIR 1965 SC
183] . That issue does not arise for our consideration.
50. On a consideration of the entire material placed before us by the
learned counsel, we record our conclusions as follows:
50.1. The provisions of clause (3) of Section 123 of the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 are required to be read and appreciated in the
context of simultaneous and contemporaneous amendments inserting
clause (3-A) in Section 123 of the Act and inserting Section 153-A in
the Penal Code, 1860.
50.2. So read together, and for maintaining the purity of the electoral
process and not vitiating it, clause (3) of Section 123 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 must be given a broad and
purposive interpretation thereby bringing within the sweep of a
corrupt practice any appeal made to an elector by a candidate or his
agent or by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his
election agent to vote or refrain from voting for the furtherance of the
prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially
affecting the election of any candidate on the grounds of the religion,
race, caste, community or language of (i) any candidate, or (ii) his
agent, or (iii) any other person making the appeal with the consent of
the candidate, or (iv) the elector.
50.3. It is a matter of evidence for determining whether an appeal has
at all been made to an elector and whether the appeal if made is in
violation of the provisions of clause (3) of Section 123 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951.”
147. After the decision in Indra Sawhney, the NCBC Act was enacted by
Parliament in 1993. The scheme of that enactment showed that the NCBC was
tasked with making recommendations for various purposes; especially, (by Section
9 (1)) to “examine requests for inclusion of any class of citizens as a backward
class in the lists and hear complaints of over-inclusion or under-inclusion of any
backward class in such lists and tender such advice to the Central Government as
it deems appropriate”. By all accounts, that commission embarked on its task and
identified SEBCs in all the 31 states and union territories in India. According to the
information available127, as many as 2479 castes and communities have been
notified as backward classes, throughout the entire country, in relation to each state
and union territory. It is nobody’s case that the statutory commission – NCBC was
not functioning properly, or that there was any interference with its work. Nor is
there any suggestion that states voiced resentment at the decisions or
recommendations of the NCBC. Given these, the important question that hangs in
the air- if one can say so- is why did Parliament have to go to such great lengths, to
merely confer constitutional status, upon the NCBC, and at the same time, tie the
hands of the Union Government, robbing it of the flexibility it always had, of
modifying or amending the list of OBCs for the purposes of the Union Government
and Central public sector employment, and for purposes of schemes and admission
to institutions, under Article 15(4).
148. It was asserted by the Attorney General and the states, that the move to
amend the Constitution was only to empower the Central Government to publish a
list, for union employment and Central PSU posts. That power always existed-
under the NCBC Act. Concededly, the states were not interfering with those lists.
The Union always had and exercised power to add or vary the contents of such lists
for central posts, PSUs and institutions, whether it enacted a law or not. There is no
reason why rigidity had to be imparted to the position with regard to preparation of
a list, by taking away the flexibility of the President to amend the lists, and
requiring it to approach Parliament, after initially publishing a list under Article
342A. Again, if this court’s direction in Indra Sawhney is the reason, then there is
no enabling legislation in all states, for setting up commissions. Rather, to require
127Website of the Ministry of Social Justice, Central Government: http://socialjustice.nic.in/UserView/index?
mid=76674 accessed on 12.04.2012 at 22.02 hrs.
the President on the aid and advice of the Union Council of Ministers to issue a
notification which can be only changed by Parliament (by reason of Article 342A),
is mystifying.
149. The interpretation suggested by the respondents, and by Ashok Bhushan, J.,
that the power of the states, which existed till the 102 nd Amendment was made,
continues unimpeded, is not borne out. Such an interpretation amounts to saying
that Parliament went to great lengths by defining, for the first time, the term
SEBC128 in the Constitution, and provided for one notification under Article
342Aissued by the President, which would “specify the socially and educationally
backward classes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be
socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that State or Union
territory”, and then, restricted the width of the term “ deemed for purposes of this
Constitution” by giving primacy to the term “Central List”. Such an interpretation
restricts the specification of a community as backward, in relation to that State or
Union territory, only for purposes of the Central List, i.e., for purposes of central
government employment and Central Institutions. Such an interpretation with
respect, is strained; it deprives plain and grammatical meaning to the provisions
introduced by the 102nd Amendment, has the effect of tying the hands of the
Central Government, and at the same time, grants the states unlimited latitude in
the manner of inclusion of any class of citizens as backward.
150. The claim that the interpretation suggested by the respondents is pragmatic
and conforms to the doctrine of purposive interpretation, with respect, cannot be
accepted. It completely undermines the width and amplitude of the following:
(a) The deeming fiction introduced by the 102nd Amendment, while inserting
128which per Article 366 (26C) “means such backward classes as are so deemed under article 342A for the
purposes of this Constitution”
(b) The use of the term “means” which has been interpreted to imply an
exhaustive definitional expression, in several decisions of this court 129, as
a device to place the matter beyond the pale of interpretation, to ensure
that the only meaning attributable is the one directed by the provision.
Thus, SEBCs are, by reason of Article 366 (26C) only those deemed to be
so under Article 342A.
(c) The emphasis is on the community- upon being included, under Article
342A, for the purposes of this Constitution being “deemed to be”
socially and educationally backward classes, in Article 366 (26C). Thus,
for all purposes under the Constitution, such communities are deemed to
be SEBCs.
(d) The logical corollary is that such inclusion is for the purposes of the
constitution, to enable state and central government benefits, i.e. welfare
measures, special provisions under Articles 15 (4) and 15 (5), as well as
employment, under Article 16 (4). The enactment of this provision
excludes all other methods of identification, by any other body - either
the state, or any state commission or authority.
(e) The use of the expression for the purposes of this Constitution, - in
Article 342A (1), also emphasizes the idea that for all purposes, i.e under
Article 15 (4), 15 (5), and 16 (4), only the communities or classes
deemed to be SEBCs under Article342A would be treated as such, in
relation to the State or Union territory concerned.
129Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corpn. Ltd. v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, (1990) 3 SCC 682
where a Constitution Bench stated:
“72. The definition has used the word ‘means’. When a statute says that a word or phrase shall “mean”—
not merely that it shall “include” — certain things or acts, “the definition is a hard-and-fast definition, and no other
meaning can be assigned to the expression than is put down in definition” (per Esher,
M.R., Gough v. Gough [(1891) 2 QB 665] ). A definition is an explicit statement of the full connotation of a term.”
Also P. Kasilingam v PSG College of Technology 1995 Supp (2) SCC 348; Black Diamond Beverages v
Commercial Tax Officer 1998 (1) SCC 458; Godrej and Boyce Manufacturing Co v State of Maharashtra 2014 (3)
(f) Article 338 (10) was amended, to delete references to backward class of
citizens. It originally stated that scheduled castes also included references
"to such other backward classes as the President may, on receipt of the
report of a Commission appointed under clause (1) of article 340, by
order specify and also". These expressions were omitted and an entirely
new provision, exclusively for purpose of socially and educationally
backward classes, was inserted (Article 338B), which has to
independently consider all aspects relating to SCBCs, in a manner
identical to SCs and STs.
151. If all these factors are kept in mind, there can be no room for doubt that “the
Central List” in Article 342A (2) is none other than the list published in Article
342A(1) for the purposes of the Constitution. This means that after the introduction
of these provisions, the final say in regard to inclusion or exclusion (or
modification of lists) of SEBCs is firstly with the President, and thereafter, in case
of modification or exclusion from the lists initially published, with the Parliament.
152. This sequitur is the only reason why change was envisioned in the first
placeby Parliament, sitting in its constituent capacity, no less, which is to alter the
entire regime by ensuring that the final say in the matter of identification of SEBCs
would follow the same pattern as exists, in relation to the most backward classes
among all citizens, (i.e. the SCs and STs, through Articles 338, 338A, 341 and
342). Too much cannot be read into the use of the expression the Central list for
the simple reason that it is a list, prepared and published by the President, on the
aid and advice of the Union Council of Ministers. The term Central is no doubt,
unusual, but it occurs in the Constitution in several places. At the same time, the
Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister advices the President and
provides information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and
proposals for legislation (Article 78). Similarly, Article 77 uses the term “the
Government of India”. Given that these terms are used interchangeably, and mean
the same, “the Central List” carries no other signification than the list notified
under Article 342A(1), by the President at the behest of the Central Government.
153. It is noticeable that Article 367 of the Constitution of India incorporates, by
reference, the definitions set out in the General Clauses Act, 1897, as those
operating in relation to expressions not defined expressly in the Constitution
itself130. By Section 3 (8) (b) of that Act, “Central Government” means, after
commencement of the Constitution, the President of India.131In a recent decision, K.
Lakshminarayanan v. Union of India132 this court held that
130367. Interpretation.—(1) Unless the context otherwise requires, the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall, subject
to any adaptations and modifications that may be made therein under article 372, apply for the interpretation of this
Constitution as it applies for the interpretation of an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India.
(2) Any reference in this Constitution to Acts or laws of, or made by, Parliament, or to Acts or laws of, or
made by, the Legislature of a State, shall be construed as including a reference to an Ordinance made by the
President or, to an Ordinance made by a Governor, as the case may be.
(3) For the purposes of this Constitution ―”foreign State” means any State other than India:
Provided that, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the President may by order4
declare any State not to be a foreign State for such purposes as may be specified in the order.”
“3. Definitions—In this Act, and in all Central Acts and Regulations made after the commencement of this
Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,
(a) in relation to anything done before the commencement of the Constitution, mean the Governor General
or the Governor General in Council, as the case may be; and shall include—
(i) in relation to functions entrusted under sub-section (1) of section 124 of the Government of India Act,
1935, to the Government of a Province, the Provincial Government acting within the scope of the authority given to
(ii) in relation to the administration of a Chief Commissioner’s Province, the Chief Commissioner acting
within the scope of the authority given to him under sub-section (3) of section 94 of the said Act; and
(b) in relation to anything done or to be done after the commencement of the Constitution, mean the
(i) in relation to functions entrusted under clause (1) of article 258 of the Constitution, to the Government
of a State, the State Government acting within the scope of the authority given to it under that clause; 1 ***
(ii) in relation to the administration of a Part C State 2 before the commencement of the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956], the Chief Commissioner or the Lieutenant Governor or the Government of a
neighbouring State or other authority acting within the scope of the authority given to him or it under article 239 or
article 243 of the Constitution, as the case may be; and
(iii) in relation to the administration of a Union territory, the administrator thereof acting within the scope
of the authority given to him under article 239 of the Constitution”
“24. Thus, it is clear that the definition of Central Government, which
means the President is not controlled by the second expression “and
shall include the Administrator”. The ordinary or popular meaning of
the words “the President” occurring in Section 3(8)(b) has to be
given and the second part of the definition shall not in any way
control or affect the first part of the definition as observed above. In
the definition of Central Government, an Administrator shall be read
when he has been authorised or delegated a particular function under
the circumstances as indicated above. No statutory rules or any
delegation has been referred to or brought on record under which the
Administrator is entitled or authorised to make nomination in the
Legislative Assembly of the Union Territory of Puducherry. Thus, in
the present case, the definition of Central Government, as occurring
in Section 3(3) of the 1963 Act has to be read as to mean the President
and not the Administrator. The issue is answered accordingly.”
Article 342A (1) does not use the expression “Central Government”. Nevertheless,
Article 342A (2) uses the expression “Central List” which has led to an elaborate
interpretive discourse. If the logic of Article 367 (1) of the Constitution, together
with Section 3 (8) (b) of the General Clauses Act, were to be applied, “Central
List” necessarily refers to the list under Article 342A (1), which is prepared by the
President, for the purpose of the Constitution. The other interpretation, with
respect, would be unduly narrow and restrictive; it would have the effect of adding
words such as to the effect that the Central List, would “apply in relation to the
Central Government”. Such an addition of terms, with respect, cannot be resorted
to, when interpreting a Constitutional amendment, The amended provisions clearly
state that the determination is for the purpose of the Constitution and that SEBCs
(per Article 366 (26C) are deemed to be as determined in Article 342A; Article
342A states that the President shall by notification publish SEBCs in relation to
states and union territories, for the purpose of the Constitution.
154. There are other compelling reasons too, why the restrictive interpretation of
Article 342A, limiting the exercise of identification for the purpose of central
employment and central benefits(and not made applicable to states) is to be
avoided as opposed to the interpretation based on the plain language of the new
provisions, which has to be adopted.
155. Parliament, through the 102ndAmendment clearly intended that the existing
legal regime for identification of communities as SCs and STs and for their
inclusion in the list of SCs and STs under Articles 341 and 342, which had hitherto
existed, ought to be replicated in relation to identification of SEBCs. To achieve
that, Parliament inserted Article 338B – which is a mirror image of Articles 338
and 338A. The tasks assigned to the new Commission for Backward Classes which
is envisioned as a multi-member Commission, are radically different from the
duties which were assigned by Parliament in the NCBC Act. Under Section 9 of
the erstwhile NCBC Act, which was repealed just before the commencement of the
102nd amendment, the NCBC was to examine requests for inclusion of any class of
citizens as backward classes in the list and the advice of the Commission was
ordinarily binding upon the Central Government. Section 11 provided for a
periodical revision of lists. As noticed by Ashok Bhushan, J., Article 338B
envisions a larger role for the new Commission. This Commission not only advises
the Central Government but also the States. It is impossible to read Article 338B in
isolation from the pre-existing parimateria provisions; it must be interpreted in the
light of the other two provisions which had existed all this while – Articles 338 and
338A. Those provisions clearly contemplate the same consultative role with the
Commission on policy matters, of the Central Government as well as the State
Governments. This is evident from sub-article (9) of these Articles. Thus, the
Commission – under Article 338B is not only assigned a constitutional role but is
also expected to act as an expert and engage with experts in the determination of
the communities. Article 338B(5) uses the term “SEBC” no less than on six
occasions. The expression also occurs in Article 338B(9). Thus, for the purposes of
the Constitution, the Commission newly established under Article 338B, i.e., the
National Commission for Backward Classes shall be the only body to whom both
the Central Government and the State Governments have to turn, in all matters of
policy. Necessarily, the question of matters of policy would also include
identification of castes or communities as backward classes.
156. If the intention of the Parliament in amending the Constitution were to
merely confer or clothe the National Commission with constitutional status, the
matter would have ended by inserting Article 338B. To that end, the argument of
the respondents is understandable. Short of the task of identification, (which could
have continued with the states), if the amendment had not inserted Article 342A,
the States would have been duty bound to consult the Commission under Article
338B. The interpretation by Ashok Bhushan, J. to that extent might have been
acceptable. However, that the Constitution was amended further to introduce
Article 342A, containing the phraseology that it does, adding an entirely new
dimension which the court has to interpret, after considering the light of the
previous authorities, as also whenever new provisions were added to the
Constitution and more importantly, when such amendments were also
accompanied by changes in the definition clause.
157. The previous part of this judgment has discussed various authorities which
had considered one or the other clauses of Article 366, i.e the NDMC case, Tata
Consultancy (supra), Willamson Financial Services (supra). The NDMC case was
decided by a nine-judge bench; in all the other decisions, this court gave the fullest
latitude to the expressions in the definition clause while interpreting them in the
peculiar facts of the case. Similarly, when constitutional amendments introduced
new definitions such as in Article 366(29A), judicial interpretation leaned in favour
of giving literal meaning to the terms used which had led to change in the existing
tax regime. Such changes too limited the State’s legislative powers. Thus, for
instance, in the Constitution bench judgments in Builders Association (supra) and
in 20th Century Leasing (supra), this Court had decisively ruled that the taxing
power of the States was explained by the amendment but at the same time was
limited in more than one manner by the express terms which had introduced a new
entry in the Central or Union legislative field. Furthermore, the principles on which
taxation could be resorted to by the States too had to be defined by the Union
Government. In other cases, whenever constitutional amendments brought about
changes in the existing status quo like in Kihoto Hollohan (supra) or limited the
legislative power constraining the state from expanding its council of ministers
beyond a certain percentage as with the introduction of Article 164(1A)in
Bimolangshu Roy(supra). This Court gave full literal effect to the terms of the
amendment after understanding the rationale for the change.
158. In Ashok Kumar Thakur (supra) and N. Nagraj (supra) the changes brought
through Constitutional Amendments were the subject matter of interpretation. In
Nagaraj, they were also the subject matter of challenge on the ground that the
amendments violated the basic structure of the Constitution. There too, the Court
interpreted the terms of the amendment by adopting a plain and literal meaning and
not by cutting down or reading down any term or phrase. In Ashok Kumar Thakur
(supra), the introduction of the new and radical Article 15(5) enabled States to
make special provisions for socially and educationally backward classes of
citizens, in unaided private educational institutions.
159. Given the weight of such precedents- which point to this court(i) giving full
effect to newly added provisions, (ii) by adopting the literal meaning in the
definition, set out in the Constitution (iii) as well as in the amendments to the
definition clause, and (iv) all of which noticed the changes brought about through
the amendments, and gave them plain effect, it is difficult to accept that the power
of amendment of the Constitution, in accordance with the special procedure set out
in Article 368 – was used to about bring cosmetic changes conferring constitutional
status to NCBC. The conferment of constitutional status – as was noticed
previously, is achieved by only inserting Article 338B. However, the fact that it
mirrors the previous two provisions of Articles 338 and 338A and borrows from
that pattern clearly suggests that the new Commission is to have an identical role
much like the Commissions that advice the Central Government and Parliament
with respect to all matters pertaining to SCs and STs. Therefore, the new
Commission is expected to play a decisive role in the preparation of lists, which
the Constitution set apart as one list, deemed to be the list of SEBCs for the
purposes of Constitution in relation to every State and Union Territory. The
interplay between Articles 366(26C) and 338B is therefore crucial. The term
“deemed to be for the purposes of this Constitution” and a reference to Article
342A would necessarily mean that even the provision under Article 338B, is to be
interpreted in the same light. In other words, were the intention merely to confer
constitutional status, that would have been achieved by an insertion of the
provision in Article 338B without any other amendment, such as being in the
definition clause under 366 or the insertion of 342A.
160. The change brought about by the 102 ndAmendment by introducing Sub-
Article (26C) to Article 366 and inserting a new provision - Article 342A, to my
mind, brings about a total alignment with the existing constitutional scheme for
identification of backward classes, with the manner and the way in which
identification of SCs and STs has been undertaken hitherto, by the Central
Government culminating in Presidential notifications. That task is aided by two
Commissions - respectively for SCs and STs, much as in the case of the new
National Commission for Backward Classes which will undertake the task of
aiding and advising the Central Government for issuing the notification for the
purposes of the Constitution under Article 342A. The pattern of finality and a
single list, in relation to every State and UT – which exists in relation to SCs and
STs (Articles 341 and 342) now has been replicated with the introduction of Article
161. There have to be strong, compelling reasons for this Court to depart from the
interpretation which has been hitherto placed on the definition clause. As has been
demonstrated in more than one case, the interpretation of the definition clause in its
own terms in respect of the original constitutional provisions as well as the new
terms brought in by way of amendment (which also brought in substantive
amendments) have consistently shown a particular trend. If one keeps in mind the
interpretation of Articles 341 and 342 from the earliest decision in Bhayalal
(supra) and Bir Singh (supra), the only conclusion is that the task of examining
requests or demands for inclusion or exclusion is in the first instance only with the
President [Article 342(1)]. In this task, the President, i.e. the Central Government
is aided by the work of the Commissions set up under Articles 338 and 338A.
Upon the publication of the list containing the notification under Articles 341(1)
and 342(1), for the purposes of the Constitution in relation to the concerned State
or the concerned UT, the list of SCs and STs is conclusive. Undoubtedly, these
were the original provisions. Yet, one must be mindful of a crucial fact, which is
that the task for making special provisions under Article 15 and for making
reservations under Article 16(4) extends to the States. The power exercised by the
President in relation to every State vis-à-vis SCs and STs has been smooth and by
all accounts, there has been no resentment or friction. Once the concerned
community or caste is reflected in the list of one or the other State or Union
Territory, the extent of the benefits to be provided to members of such community
is a matter that lies entirely in the States’ domain. The amendment or modification
of any State list, can be undertaken only by Parliament, not even by the President.
162. Much like in the case of the alignment of Article 338B with the other two
previously existing provisions of the Constitution, Article 342A aligns the function
(of identification of SEBCs and publishing the list, by the President) with Articles
341 and 342. These three sets of consecutive provisions, share their umbilical cord
with the definition clause [Article 366(24) in relation to SCs; Article 366(25) in
relation to STs and the new 366(26C) in relation to SEBCs]. This two-way linkage
between the definition clause with the substantive provisions is not without
significance. As has been held in Marri Chandra Shekar (supra); Action
Committee (supra) and Bir Singh (supra), the expression “for the purposes of the
Constitution” has to be given fullest weight. Therefore, whenever lists are prepared
under these three provisions in relation to States or UTs, the classes and castes
included in such list and no other are deemed to be castes or classes falling within
the one or the other category (SCs, STs, SEBCs) in relation to the particular State
or UT for the purposes of the Constitution.
163. If one were to, for the sake of argument, consider the deliberations before
the Select Committee reflected in its report, it is evident that amendments at three
places were moved to place the matter beyond controversy and clarify that States’
jurisdiction and power to identify SEBCs would remain undisturbed. To achieve
this, proposed Articles 342A(3) & (4) were introduced. These proposed
amendments were not accepted; and were dropped. No doubt, the rationale for
dropping (the amendments) was the impression given in the form of an assurance
that the express terms of the amendment did not divest the States of their power.
Further, paras 56 and 57 of the Select Committee report clearly state that the
Governor acts on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers of the State and
that Articles 341 and 342 provide for consultation with the Governor in relation to
SCs and STs of the concerned States. The assurance held out was that, “at no time
has the State been excluded in the consultation process. It is by way of the State
Government invariably which recommends to the President the category of
inclusion/exclusion in the SCs and STs. Similar provision is provided for in the
case of conferring of constitutional status to backward classes for inclusion in
Central List of SEBCs in consultation with Governor” thereby implying
consultation with the State Government. It was also stated in para 57 (of the
report)that “the expression ‘for the purpose of this Constitution’ is identical to that
phrase in Article 341 and Article 342.”
164. The deliberations of the Select Committee report only show that the existing
pattern of identification and inclusion of SCs and STs which entailed the active
involvement of the States was sought to be replicated for the purpose of preparing
the list, of OBCs, by the President. It was emphasised during the course of
arguments, an aspect that finds due reflection in the draft judgment of Ashok
Bhushan, J. that the term, “the Central List” is of crucial significance because it in
fact controls the entire provision, i.e., Article 342A, that it is in line with the Select
Committee Report as well as Parliamentary debates and that this Court has to give
it a purposive interpretation. In my respectful opinion, an isolated consideration of
the expression, “the Central List” containing classes and communities which are
deemed to be backward for the purpose of the Constitution, would undermine the
entire constitutional scheme. Parliamentary intent, on the contrary, clearly was to
replicate the existing pattern for inclusion in the list of SCs and STs for SEBCs – (a
term that had not been defined in the Constitution till then). Yet another way of
looking at the matter is that Article 342A(1) is the only provision which enables
the publication of one list of SEBCs. This provision clearly talks of publication of
a list through a Presidential notification for the purpose of the Constitution after the
process of identification. It is this list which contains members of classes or
communities which can be called as SEBCs by virtue of Article 366(26C). In other
words, the subject of Article 342A(1) determines the subject of Article
366(26C)which in turn controls and guides the definition of the term “SEBCs” for
the entire Constitution. This is achieved by using emphatic terms such as “means”
and “deemed to be”. A similar emphasis is to be found in Article 342A(1) which
uses “shall for the purposes of the Constitution”. In both cases, i.e. Articles
366(26C) and 342A(1), there are no words limiting, or terms indicative of
restriction as to the extent to which such inclusion is to operate. Thus, like in the
case of Articles 341 and 342, those classes and castes included in the list of SEBCs
in relation to every State and every UT are:
(i)    For the purposes of the Constitution;
(ii)   deemed to be SEBCs in relation to concerned State or Union Territory.
165. The width and amplitude of the expression “shall be deemed to be” of the
expression cannot be diluted or cut down in any manner whatsoever. If one
understands that this list in fact identifies SEBCs for the purposes of the
Constitution, all that follows in Article 342A(2) is that such list can only be
amended by Parliament. The Court, therefore, has to see the object and content of
the entire Article to determine what it means. So viewed, firstly it is linked with
Article 366(26C) and the use of the terms “means” and “deemed” in the definition
is decisive, i.e., that there can be no class or caste deemed for the purposes of
Constitution other than those listed under Article 342A. Secondly, Article 342A(1)
is the only provision conferring power by which identification is undertaken by the
President in the first instance. This identification and publication of the list
containing the cases and communities is in relation to each State and each Union
Territory. Third, after publication of this notification, if changes are brought about
to it by inclusion or exclusion from that list, (called the “Central List” of SEBCs
for the first time), Parliament alone can amend it. It is important that the expression
“the Central List” is clarified by the phrase “socially and educationally backward
classes specified in a notification under Clause (1)” which is reinforced
subsequently by the use of the term “aforesaid notification”. Thus, the subject
matter of initial identification and publication of the list for the purposes of the
Constitution is by the published President alone (under the aid and advice of the
Union Council of Ministers) and any subsequent variation by way of inclusion or
exclusion can be achieved only through an amendment by law, of that list.
166. If one interprets the entire scheme involving Articles 366(26C), 342A(1) and
342A(2), the irresistible conclusion that follows is that the power of publishing the
list of SEBCs, in relation to every State and Union Territory for the purposes of the
Constitution is with the President only. Such notification is later called as the
Central List by Article 342A(2); it can only be amended by the Parliament. The
contrary interpretation virtually reads into the provisions of the Constitution
amendments which were proposed and expressly rejected in the proceedings of the
Select Committee; it also has the effect of reading in what certain dissenting
members had proposed. Furthermore, by the interpretive process of taking into
account the deliberations before the Select Committee, and speeches on the floor of
the Parliament this Court would be reading into the Constitution provisions which
no longer exist i.e., that the State can continue to carry out identification of SEBCs.
This exercise would be contrary to the express terms.
167. Therefore, the above expressions, having regard to the precedents of this
Court with respect to (i) interpretation of the definition clause under Article 366;
(ii) interpretation of new definitions inserted in Article 366 and (iii) interpretation
of amendments made to the Constitution which inserted new provisions, where the
Court always leant in favour of giving fullest effect to the substantive provisions,
this court has to adopt the same approach, to usher change, by plain, literal
construction. This court never whittled down the terminology through extrinsic
aids such as speeches made on the floor of the Parliament or Select Committee
reports. In this instance, doing so would be giving effect to what Parliamentarians
said or Ministers said, ignoring thereby, the plain terms of the Constitution. As
stated earlier, the Court cannot assume that Parliament merely indicated a cosmetic
change by conferment of constitutional changes which could have been best
achieved by introducing Article 338B.
168. Besides the judgment in Kihoto Hollohan (supra), this court, in
Raghunathrao Ganpatrao v. Union of India133, dwelt on the duty of this court, to
discern the meaning, and give effect to amendments to the Constitution. The court
quoted from Walter F. Murphy, who in Constitutions, Constitutionalism and
Democracy explained what an ‘amendment’ meant:
“Thus an amendment corrects errors of commission or omission,
modifies the system without fundamentally changing its nature — that
is, an amendment operates within the theoretical parameters of the
existing Constitution.”
This court then observed as follows:
“86. In our Constitution, there are specific provisions for amending
the Constitution. The amendments had to be made only under and by
the authority of the Constitution strictly following the modes
prescribed, of course subject to the limitations either inherent or
implied. The said power cannot be limited by any vague doctrine of
repugnancy. There are many outstanding interpretative decisions
delineating the limitations so that the constitutional fabric may not be
impaired or damaged. The amendment which is a change or
alteration is only for the purpose of making the Constitution more
perfect, effective and meaningful. But at the same time, one should
keep guard over the process of amending any provision of the
Constitution so that it does not result in abrogation or destruction of
its basic structure or loss of its original identity and character and
render the Constitution unworkable. The court is not concerned with
the wisdom behind or propriety of the constitutional amendment
because these are the matters for those to consider who are vested
with the authority to make the Constitutional amendment. All that the
court is concerned with are (1) whether the procedure prescribed by
Article 368 is strictly complied with? and (2) whether the amendment
has destroyed or damaged the basic structure or the essential features
of the Constitution.”
169. In his article Statutory Interpretation and Constitutional Legislation
(sourced from the Cambridge Repository’s Interpreting Constitutional Legislation
David Feldman134 states that at times, there is no clear indication why a statute or
“Statutes usually carry on their faces no indication of the mischief at
which they are aimed; they do not tell a story. Looking at the statute
as a whole will not always help: many statutes are collections of knee-
jerk reactions to a number of different stimuli, and the degree of
coherence is further reduced where changes in government policy are
given effect by amending earlier legislation drafted to give effect to
different policies.”
The article then goes on to emphasize that the context, and the pre-existing regime
has to be considered, while interpreting the amendment or provision:
“Constitutional provisions establishing the state and its main
institutions will often not be a response to a particular mischief. A
state’s institutional design is more likely to reflect a political theory
and idea of good government, as in the USA., or to be a result of
gradual accretion, as in the UK, than to be a reaction to an
identifiable problem. On the other hand, problems arising in the pre-
constitutional period may have directly influenced the choice of
political theory, and so have indirectly affected the distribution of
responsibilities between institutions, the powers allocated to each
institution, their relationships with each other, their powers, and
forms of accountability.”
170. As to what was the rationale for introducing Article 366(26C) and the other
substantive amendments by the 102nd Amendment, the statement of objects and
134Professor of law, Cambridge University and QC. Also former international judge in the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovnahttps://aspace.repository.cam.ac.uk/bitstream/handle/1810/246176/OA1838_Statutory-
interpretation-and-constitutional-legislation-FINAL-19-03-14.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
reasons is not precise. Even the Select Committee Report only voices that
constitutional status is to be conferred upon the new Commission which would
undertake its task and that the pattern existing with respect to SCs and STs would
be followed. In these circumstances, given that the limited interpretation would
virtually continue the status quo, this Court has to take into account the state of
affairs which existed at the time of introduction of the amendment.
171. The rationale for the amendment, highlighting the need for provisions such
as Article 338B, 342A read with Article 366(26C) is that Parliament had the
experience of about 71 years’ working of the Constitution and the system with
respect to matters regarding identification of the most backward classes of
communities, i.e., SCs and STs. By the 102nd Amendment, one commission for
SEBCs was set up to meet the aspirations and expectations of the population of the
country who might have become SEBCs for various reasons, to voice their
concerns directly for consideration by the National Commission under Article
338B, which could then become the subject matter of inclusion under Article
172. An offshoot of the 102ndAmendment possibly would be that dominant
groups or communities, once included, as SEBCs by states would, due to their
relative “forward” status, likely take a disproportionate share of state benefits of
reservation in employment and admission benefits to state institutions. Their
inclusion can well result in shrinkage of the real share of reservation benefits for
the most backward. This consequence can be avoided, if a commission or body,
such as the one under Article 338B evolves and applies rational and relevant
criteria.
173. The existence of a permanent body, which would objectively, without being
pressurised by the dust and din of electoral politics, consider the claims for
inclusion, not based on ad-hoc criteria, but upon uniformly evolved criteria, with
the aid of experts, in a scientific manner, be in consonance with the constitutional
objectives of providing benefits to SEBCs, having regard to relative regional and
intra state levels of progress and development. Given all these factors, this Court is
of the opinion that the 102ndAmendment, by inserting 366(26C), 342A, 338B and
342A aligned the mechanism for identification of SEBCs with the existing
mechanism for identification of SCs/STs.
174. At this stage, a word about Article 338B is necessary. Earlier, it was noticed
that this provision mirrors Articles 338 and 338A and sets out various provisions
for setting up a National Commission which is like its counterparts, in relation to
SCs and STs (Articles 338 and 338A). The consultative provisions under Articles
338B(7) and 338B(9) in the opinion of this Court, only imply that in matters of
identification, the States can make their recommendations. However, by reason of
Article 342A, it is the President, i.e. the Union Government only, whose decision is
final and determinative. The determination made for inclusion or exclusion can be
amended through a law made by Parliament alone. Given that Article 338(B)(9)
enjoins the State/UT to consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting SEBCs, this consultation cannot imply that the States’ view would be of
such weight, as to be determinative or final and submit. The States can by virtue of
Article 338(7) consider the report of the Commission and are obliged to table the
recommendations relating to them before their legislature. The State can even
voice its reservations and state why it cannot accept the report. Further, given the
imperative and categorical phraseology of Article 342A, the final decision of
whether to include any caste or community in the list of SCBCs is that of the
Union Government, i.e. the President.
175. This Court is also of the opinion that the change brought about by the 102 nd
Amendment, especially Article 342A is only with respect to the process of
identification of SEBCs and their list. Necessarily, the power to frame policies and
legislation with regard to all other matters, i.e. the welfare schemes for SEBCs,
setting up of institutions, grants, scholarships, extent of reservations and special
provisions under Article 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) are entirely with by the State
Government in relation to its institutions and its public services (including services
under agencies and corporations and companies controlled by the State
Government). In other words, the extent of reservations, the kind of benefits, the
quantum of scholarships, the number of schools which are to be specially provided
under Article 15(4) or any other beneficial or welfare scheme which is conceivable
under Article 15(4) can all be achieved by the State through its legislative and
executive powers. This power would include making suggestions and collecting
data – if necessary, through statutory commissions, for making recommendations
towards inclusion or exclusion of castes and communities to the President on the
aid and advice of the Union Council of Ministers under Article 342A. This will
accord with the spirit of the Constitution under Article 338B and the principle of
cooperative federalism135 which guides the interpretation of this Constitution.
176. The President has not thus far prepared and published a list under Article
342A (1). In view of the categorical mandate of Article 342A – which has to be
necessarily read along with Article 366(26C), on and from the date of coming into
force of the 102nd Amendment Act, only the President, i.e. the Central Government
has the power of ultimately identifying the classes and castes as SEBCs. This court
is conscious that though the amendment came into force more than two years ago,
as yet no list has been notified under Article 342A. It is also noteworthy that the
NCBC Act has been repealed. In these circumstances, the Court holds that the
President should after due consultation with the Commission set up under Article
338B expeditiously, publish a comprehensive list under 342A(1). This exercise
should preferably be completed with utmost expedition given the public
importance of the matter. Till such time, the SEBC lists prepared by the states
135Jindal Stainless Ltd. v. State of Haryana, 2016 SCC OnLine SC 1260; State of Rajasthan v. Union of India 1978
would continue to hold the field. These directions are given under Article 142,
having regard to the drastic consequences which would flow if it is held that all
State lists would cease to operate. The consequences of Article 342A would then be
so severe as to leave a vacuum with respect to SEBCs’ entitlement to claim
benefits under Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution.
Re: Point No. 6 Whether, Article 342A of the Constitution abrogates States
power to legislate or classify in respect of “any backward class of citizens” and
thereby affects the federal policy / structure of the Constitution of India?
177. In W.P.938/2020, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Amol. P. Karande
urged that the provisions of the 102 nd Amendment, especially Article 366(26C) and
Article 342A violate the essential features or the basic structure of the Constitution.
It was argued that these provisions impact the federal structure by denuding the
State of its power to fully legislate in favour of SEBCs under Entry 25 and Entry
41 of List II, and provide for reservations in favour of SEBCs. It was argued that
the power to identify and make suitable provisions in favour of SEBCs has always
been that of the States. This constitutional position was recognized in Indra
Sawhney (supra), when the Court required the State Government to set up
permanent Commissions. Through the impugned provisions, the President has now
been conferred exclusive power to undertake the task of identification of SEBCs
for the purposes of the Constitution. It was submitted that this strikes at the root of
the federal structure because it is the people who elect the members of the State
legislatures, who frame policies suitable for their peculiarly situated needs, having
regard to the demands of the region and its people.
178. Learned counsel argued that the original Constitution had set apart the power
to identify SCs and STs and conferred it upon the President – after which,
amendment could be carried out by the Parliament. However, such a power was
advisably retained so far as the States were concerned, with their executives and
legislatures. The deprivation of the States’ power strikes at the root of its
jurisdiction to ensure that its residents get suitable welfare measures in the form of
schemes applicable to SEBCs as well as reservations.
179. Learned counsel relied upon certain passages of the judgment of this Court
in Kesavananda Bharti v. State of Kerala136 to support the argument that without
submitting the amendment for rectification under the proviso to Article 368(2), to
the extent it denuded the State legislatures of their powers to make laws in respect
of various fields under the State List too, the amendment would be void.
180. The Learned Attorney General who represented the Union argued that there
is no question of the 102nd Amendment Act or any of its provisions violating any
essential feature of the Constitution. It was submitted that unless the amendment in
question directly affects (i.e. takes away the legislative power altogether in the list
rather than a part of its content by amending any of the provisions in List II or List
III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution), there is no need for seeking
rectification of a majority of the statutes. The Attorney General relied upon a
judgment of this Court in Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan137.
181. Two issues arise with respect to the validity of provisions inserted by the
102nd Amendment Act. The first is a facial challenge inasmuch as the petitioner
urges that without following the procedure indicated in the proviso to Article
368(2), i.e. seeking approval or ratification of atleast one half of the legislative
assemblies of all the States, the amendment is void. In this regard what is
noticeable is that direct amendments to any of the legislative entries in the three
lists of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution requires ratification. Thus, the
insertion of substantive provisions that might impact future legislation by the State
in an indirect or oblique manner would not necessarily fall afoul of the
Constitution for not complying with the procedure spelt out in the proviso to
Article 368(2). In Sajjan Singh (supra), this Court held as follows:
“The question which calls for our decision is: what would be the
requirement about making an amendment in a constitutional provision
contained in Part III, if as a result of the said amendment, the powers
conferred on the High Courts under Article 226 are likely to be
affected?”
The Sajjan Singh court repelled the challenge, holding that
“… Thus, if the pith and substance test is applied to the amendment
made by the impugned Act, it would be clear that Parliament is
seeking to amend fundamental rights solely with the object of
removing any possible obstacle in the fulfilment of the socio-economic
policy in which the party in power believes. If that be so, the effect of
the amendment on the area over which the High Courts' powers
prescribed by Article 226 operate, is incidental and in the present
case can be described as of an insignificant order. The impugned Act
does not purport to change the provisions of Article 226 and it cannot
be said even to have that effect directly or in any appreciable
measure. That is why we think that the argument that the impugned
Act falls under the proviso, cannot be sustained.
182. The majority judgment, therefore decisively held that an interpretation
which hinges on indirect impact of a provision, the amendment of which needs
ratification of the states, does not violate the Constitution and that unless the
amendment actually deletes or alters any of the Entries in the three lists of the
Seventh Schedule, or directly amends an Article for which ratification is necessary,
recourse to the proviso to Article 368 (2) was not necessary.
183. More recently, this issue was gone into in Kihoto Hollohan, where a
challenge on the ground that all provisions of an amendment which introduced the
Tenth Schedule were void for not following the procedure under the proviso to
Article 368, were questioned. The Court proceeded to analyse every provision of
the Tenth Schedule and held that para 7, which excluded the jurisdiction of all
Courts, had the effect of divesting the jurisdiction of Courts under Articles 226 and
32 of the Constitution. In other words, the direct result of the amendment was to
bar the jurisdiction of High Courts and thus, it directly impacted Chapter 5 of Part
VI; a ratification was required by a majority of the States. Since that procedure was
not followed, para 7 was held to be violative of the basic structure of the
Constitution. The Court applied the doctrine of severability and held that the other
parts of the amendment, contained in the Tenth Schedule did not need any such
ratification and that para 7 alone would be severed on the ground of its being
contrary to express constitutional provisions. This court ruled as follows:
“59. In Sajjan Singh case [(1965) 1 SCR 933 : AIR 1965 SC 845] a
similar contention was raised against the validity of the Constitution
(Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964 by which Article 31-A was again
amended and 44 statutes were added to the Ninth Schedule to the
Constitution. The question again was whether the amendment
required ratification under the proviso to Article 368. This Court
noticed the question thus: (SCR p. 940)
76. The test of severability requires the Court to ascertain whether the
legislature would at all have enacted the law if the severed part was
not the part of the law and whether after severance what survives can
stand independently and is workable. If the provisions of the Tenth
Schedule are considered in the background of the legislative history,
namely, the report of the ‘Committee on Defections’ as well as the
earlier Bills which were moved to curb the evil of defection it would
be evident that the main purpose underlying the constitutional
amendment and introduction of the Tenth Schedule is to curb the evil
of defection which was causing immense mischief in our body politic.
The ouster of jurisdiction of courts under Paragraph 7 was incidental
to and to lend strength to the main purpose which was to curb the evil
of defection. It cannot be said that the constituent body would not
have enacted the other provisions in the Tenth Schedule if it had
known that Paragraph 7 was not valid. Nor can it be said that the rest
of the provisions of the Tenth Schedule cannot stand on their own even
if Paragraph 7 is found to be unconstitutional. The provisions of
Paragraph 7 can, therefore, be held to be severable from the rest of
the provisions.
77. We accordingly hold on contentions (C) and (D):
That there is nothing in the said proviso to Article 368(2) which
detracts from the severability of a provision on account of the
inclusion of which the Bill containing the amendment requires
ratification from the rest of the provisions of such Bill which do not
attract and require such ratification. Having regard to the mandatory
language of Article 368(2) that ‘thereupon the Constitution shall
stand amended’ the operation of the proviso should not be extended to
constitutional amendments in a Bill which can stand by themselves
without such ratification.
That accordingly, the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act,
1985, insofar as it seeks to introduce the Tenth Schedule in the
Constitution of India, to the extent of its provisions which are
amenable to the legal-sovereign of the amending process of the Union
Parliament cannot be overborne by the proviso which cannot operate
in that area. There is no justification for the view that even the rest of
the provisions of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act,
1985, excluding Paragraph 7 of the Tenth Schedule become
constitutionally infirm by reason alone of the fact that one of its
severable provisions which attracted and required ratification under
the proviso to Article 368(2) was not so ratified.
That Paragraph 7 of the Tenth Schedule contains a provision which is
independent of, and stands apart from, the main provisions of the
Tenth Schedule which are intended to provide a remedy for the evil of
unprincipled and unethical political defections and, therefore, is a
severable part. The remaining provisions of the Tenth Schedule can
and do stand independently of Paragraph 7 and are complete in
themselves workable and are not truncated by the excision of
184. As far as the question of whether the amendment has the effect of violating
the basic or essential features so far as it impacts the federal structure of the
Constitution is concerned, what is noticeable is that past decisions have
emphasized that a mere change brought about through amendments howsoever
serious the impact, cannot per se be regarded as violative of the basic structure. In
Raghunathrao Ganpatrao (supra)138 the deletion of Articles 291 and 362 of the
Constitution, by amendment, was questioned on the ground that they affected the
basic structure, or essential features of the Constitution. This court rejected the
“107. On a deep consideration of the entire scheme and content of the
Constitution, we do not see any force in the above submissions. In the
present case, there is no question of change of identity on account of
the Twenty-sixth Amendment. The removal of Articles 291 and 362 has
not made any change in the personality of the Constitution either in
its scheme or in its basic features, or in its basic form or in its
character. The question of identity will arise only when there is a
change in the form, character and content of the Constitution. In fact,
in the present case, the identity of the Constitution even on the tests
proposed by the counsel of the writ petitioners and interveners,
remains the same and unchanged.”
185. In N. Nagaraj (supra), this aspect was analysed in the following terms:
“For a constitutional principle to qualify as an essential feature, it
must be established that the said principle is a part of the
constitutional law binding on the legislature. Only thereafter, the
second step is to be taken, namely, whether the principle is so
fundamental as to bind even the amending power of the Parliament,
i.e. to form a part of the basic structure. The basic structure concept
accordingly      limits     the     amending       power      of    the
……………..The values impose a positive duty on the State to ensure
their attainment as far as practicable. The rights, liberties and
freedoms of the individual are not only to be protected against the
State, they should be facilitated by it. They are to be informed.
Overarching and informing of these rights and values is the principle
of human dignity under the German basic law. Similarly, secularism is
the principle which is the overarching principle of several rights and
values under the Indian Constitution. Therefore, axioms like
secularism, democracy, reasonableness, social justice etc. are
overarching principles which provide linking factor for principle of
fundamental rights like Articles 14, 19 and
These principles are beyond the amending power of the Parliament.
Under the Indian Constitution, the word 'federalism' does not exist in
the preamble. However, its principle (not in the strict sense as in
U.S.A.) is delineated over various provisions of the Constitution. In
particular, one finds this concept in separation of powers under
Articles 245 and 246 read with the three lists in the seventh schedule
to the Constitution.
To conclude, the theory of basic structure is based on the concept of
constitutional identity. The basic structure jurisprudence is a pre-
occupation with constitutional identity.
The word 'amendment' postulates that the old constitution survives
without loss of its identity despite the change and it continues even
though it has been subjected to alteration. This is the constant theme
of the opinions in the majority decision in Kesavananda Bharati. To
destroy its identity is to abrogate the basic structure of the
Constitution. This is the principle of constitutional sovereignty.”
186. Along similar lines, Krishna Iyer, J. had remarked as to what kind of an
amendment would be abhorrent and violate the basic structure in Maharao Sahib
Shri Bhim Singhji v. Union of India139 in the following terms:
“Therefore, what is a betrayal of the basic feature is not a mere
violation of Article 14 but a shocking, unconscionable or
unscrupulous travesty of the quintessence of equal justice.”
187. By these parameters, the alteration of the content of state legislative power
in an oblique and peripheral manner would not constitute a violation of the concept
of federalism. It is only if the amendment takes away the very essence of
federalism or effectively divests the federal content of the constitution, and
denudes the states of their effective power to legislate or frame executive policies
(co-extensive with legislative power) that the amendment would take away an
essential feature or violate the basic structure of the Constitution. Applying such a
benchmark, this court is of the opinion that the power of identification of SEBCs
hitherto exercised by the states and now shifted to the domain of the President (and
for its modification, to Parliament) by virtue of Article 342A does not in any
manner violate the essential features or basic structure of the Constitution. The
102nd Amendment is also not contrary to or violative of proviso to Article 368 (2)
of the Constitution of India. As a result, it is held that the writ petition is without
merit; it is dismissed.
188.    In view of the above discussion, my conclusions are as follows:
(1) Re Point No. 1: Indra Sawhney (supra) does not require to be referred to
a larger bench nor does it require reconsideration in the light of
subsequent constitutional amendments, judgments and changed social
dynamics of the society, for the reasons set out by Ashok Bhushan, J. and
my reasons, in addition.
(2) Re Point No 2: The Maharashtra State Reservation (of seats for
admission in educational institutions in the State and for appointments in
the public services and posts under the State) for Socially and
Educationally Backward Classes (SEBC) Act, 2018 as amended in 2019
granting 12% and 13% reservation for Maratha community in addition to
50% social reservation is not covered by exceptional circumstances as
contemplated by Constitution Bench in Indra Sawhney’s case. I agree
with the reasoning and conclusions of Ashok Bhushan, J. on this point.
(3) Re Point No. 3: I agree with Ashok Bhushan, J. that the State
Government, on the strength of Maharashtra State Backward
Commission Report chaired by M.C. Gaikwad has not made out a case of
existence of extraordinary situation and exceptional circumstances in the
State to fall within the exception carved out in Indra Sawhney.
(4) Re Point No 4:Whether the Constitution One Hundred and Second
Amendment deprives the State Legislature of its power to enact a
legislation determining the socially and economically backward classes
and conferring the benefits on the said community under its enabling
(5) Re. Point No. 5 Whether, States’ power to legislate in relation to “any
backward class” under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is anyway abridged by
Article 342(A) read with Article 366(26c) of the Constitution of India.
On these two interrelated points of reference, my conclusions are as
(i) By introduction of Articles 366 (26C) and 342A through the 102 nd
Constitution of India, the President alone, to the exclusion of all other
authorities, is empowered to identify SEBCs and include them in a list to be
published under Article 342A (1), which shall be deemed to include SEBCs
in relation to each state and union territory for the purposes of the
(ii) The states can, through their existing mechanisms, or even statutory
commissions, only make suggestions to the President or the Commission
under Article 338B, for inclusion, exclusion or modification of castes or
communities, in the list to be published under Article 342A (1).
(iii) The reference to the Central List in Article 342A (2) is the one notified
by the President under Article 342A (1). It is to be the only list for all
purposes of the Constitution, in relation to each state and in relation to every
union territory. The use of the term “the Central List” is only to refer to the
list prepared and published under Article 342A (1), and no other; it does not
imply that the states have any manner of power to publish their list of
SEBCs. Once published, under Article 342A (1), the list can only be
amended through a law enacted by Parliament, by virtue of Article 342A (2).
(iv) In the task of identification of SEBCs, the President shall be guided by
the Commission set up under Article 338B; its advice shall also be sought by
the state in regard to policies that might be framed by it. If the commission
prepares a report concerning matters of identification, such a report has to be
shared with the state government, which is bound to deal with it, in
accordance with provisions of Article 338B. However, the final
determination culminates in the exercise undertaken by the President (i.e. the
Central Government, under Article 342A (1), by reason of Article 367 read
with Section 3 (8) (b) General Clauses Act).
(v) The states’ power to make reservations, in favour of particular
communities or castes, the quantum of reservations, the nature of benefits
and the kind of reservations, and all other matters falling within the ambit of
Articles 15 and 16 – except with respect to identification of SEBCs, remains
undisturbed.
(vi)    The Commission set up under Article 338B shall conclude its task
expeditiously, and make its recommendations after considering which, the
President shall expeditiously publish the notification containing the list of
SEBCs in relation to states and union territories, for the purpose of the
(vii) Till the publication of the notification mentioned in direction (vi), the
existing lists operating in all states and union territories, and for the purposes
of the Central Government and central institutions, continue to operate. This
direction is issued under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
(6) Re Point No. 6: Article 342A of the Constitution by denuding States power
to legislate or classify in respect of “any backward class of citizens” does not
affect or damage the federal polity and does not violate the basic structure of the
Constitution of India.
189. The reference is answered in the above terms. The appeals and writ petitions
are therefore, disposed of in terms of the operative order of Bhushan, J. in para 444
of his Judgment.