Manish Kumar Sharma @ Manish Kumar, son of late Satyendra Sharma,
aged 23 years, resident of Raghunathpur, Sidhirpur, P.O. Sidhirpur, P.S.
1.The State of Jharkhand
2.Seema Kumari @ Seema Mandal, daughter of Patel Mandal, resident of
For the Petitioner :- Ms. Prachi Pradipti, Advocate
For the State        :- Mr. Shailendra Kumar Tiwari, Advocate
For the O.P.No.2 :- Mr. Sumit Prakash, Advocate
4/06.12.2022          Heard Ms. Prachi Pradipti, the learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner, Mr. Sumit Prakash, the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the O.P.No.2 and Mr. Shailendra Kumar Tiwari, the learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent State.
This petition has been filed for quashing of the order dated
24.09.2021 including the entire criminal proceeding arising out of
Deoghar Mahila P.S.Case No.6 of 2021, corresponding to G.R. No.1839 of
2021, registered for the offence under section 406, 420, 376(2)(n) of the
IPC and pending before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Deoghar.
As per the Fardbeyan of the O.P.No.2, the case has been
registered alleging therein that the petitioner is posted at STP Ranchi and
during posting at Shrawan Mela, petitioner came in contact with the
informant at her father’s shop and got to know that the informant was a
married woman and a divorce litigation was pending with her earlier
husband. It is also alleged that the informant had financial terms with
the petitioner and she had deposited amount in the account of petitioner
via Google Pay, the petitioner also enticed to marry informant after her
divorce. It is further alleged that thereafter on 03.12.2019 the petitioner
put vermilion on her head at Nandan Pahar temple and married with
informant and thereafter established physical relation with her several
times by making false pretext to marry after her divorce, but on
11.02.2021, the petitioner completely denied to marry the informant.
Ms. Prachi Pradipti, the learned counsel appearing on behalf
of the petitioner submits that mother of the petitioner namely, Suman
Devi has filed the private complaint case against the O.P.No.2 being
Complaint Case No.240 of 2021 under section 147, 341, 323, 380, 406,
420, 452, 504, 34 of the IPC dated 18.02.2021 in which cognizance has
been taken. She further submits that the informant under section 164
Cr.P.C has stated that she is already married and engaged in litigation for
divorce with her husband. She submits that she was already married and
there is no question of alluring her for marriage as she was already
married and established relationship and both the petitioner and the
O.P.No.2 were adult. She submits that only on that ground the case has
been registered and even section 376(2)(n) of the IPC is not attracted.
She further submits that the order taking cognizance dated 24.09.2021 is
also not a speaking order and in that view of the matter, the entire
criminal proceeding may kindly be quashed.
On the other hand, Mr. Sumit Prakash, the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the O.P.no.2 submits that the petitioner has
established relationship with O.P.No.2 on the false pretext of marriage
and in that view of the matter, the learned court has rightly taken
congnizance. He submits that there are judgments of Hon’ble Supreme
Court that if on the pretext of marriage the relationship is established,
the case under section 376 of IPC can be maintained.
Mr. Tiwari, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent State submits that the ingredients of section 420 IPC is also
there and in that view of the matter, the learned court has rightly taken
In view of the submissions of the learned counsel appearing
on behalf of the parties, the Court has gone through the materials on
record and finds that admittedly the mother of this petitioner has filed
the complaint case against the O.P.No.2 and thereafter the present case
has been filed. Annexure-4 is the statement of the informant under
section 164 Cr.P.C. in which in paragraph no.4 she has clearly stated that
she was married with one Pradip Mandal and the case of divorce is going
on which suggest that a married woman has established relationship with
her consent with this petitioner. The question remains that when two
adult have established relationship particularly considering that the
informant is a married woman, whether section 376(2)(n) IPC can be
attracted or not ? In the case in hand, the victim who is a married
woman voluntarily had sex with the petitioner, knowing that she cannot
enter into marriage with the petitioner in view of the fact that she was a
married woman. Even assuming that promise by the petitioner for
marriage, she was knowing that she is a married woman and marriage
will not take place, and inspite of that she has established relationship
with the petitioner that promise is illegal and that cannot be a basis for
prosecution under section 376(2)(n) of the IPC. In the case in hand,
there is no question that this petitioner has allured as she was already
married and she was not divorced and inspite of that she has established
the relationship with this petitioner. Section 406 IPC is for punishment for
breach of trust. In order to bring criminal breach, to prove entrustment is
an essential ingredient under section 405 IPC. Section 420 IPC is only
made out if from the very beginning the intention of cheat is there which
is lacking in the facts and circumstances of the present case. Thus, prima
facie it appears that the ingredients of those sections are not made out.
The Court has gone through the order taking cognizance dated
24.09.2021 and finds that the learned court filled the words ‘cognizance’
and ‘personal’ in the blank space which suggest that there is non-
application of judicial mind, and in that view of the matter, the order
taking cognizance dated 24.09.2021 arising out of Deoghar Mahila
P.S.Case No.6 of 2021, corresponding to G.R. No.1839 of 2021, pending
before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Deoghar, is set aside, and
the matter is remitted back to the learned concerned court to pass afresh
order in accordance with law.
Cr.M.P.No.488 of 2022 is disposed of in the above terms.
Pending petition, if any, also stands disposed of.